---
author: Helen Schucman

date: "2011-05-06T06:00:00+00:00"
description: "A Course in Miracles is spiritual guide for life. The book begins: This is A Course in Miracles, it is a required course. Only the time you take it is voluntary.The Course as the book is commonly known, comprises of 365 lessons of spiritual guidance. It is divided into three sections: Text, Workbook for Students, and Manual for Teachers."
title: "A Course in Miracles: Original Edition"
showtoc: true
tocopen: true
---

**The Combined Original Edition**

*A Course in Miracles* is spiritual guide for life. The book begins:
"This is A Course in Miracles, it is a required course. Only the time
you take it is voluntary." "The Course" as the book is commonly known,
comprises of 365 lessons of spiritual guidance. It is divided into three
sections: *Text, Workbook for Students*, and *Manual for Teachers*.

The author, Dr. Helen Schucman channeled the content of the book over a
7-year period between 1965 and 1972 whilst she was a professor of
medical psychology at Columbia University in New York. She gave herself
no credit for the authorship of the text and claimed she received it as
a kind of mental dictation from a voice who identified himself as Jesus.
Needless to say *A Course in Miracles* has caused consternation among
certain Christians who cry, "Beware of false prophets" and while the
book is Christian in tone, much of the writing is comparable to eastern
wisdom traditions.

The book tells us of the return of Jesus. It states, "The Second Coming
is the awareness of reality, not its return. Behold, my children,
reality is here. It belongs to you and me and God and is perfectly
satisfying to all of us. Only this awareness heals because it is the
awareness of truth."

The key tenet throughout the book is forgiveness, and we are informed,
forgiveness is the answer to all of life's problems. "Let forgiveness be
the substitute for fear. This is the only rule for happy dreams." The
book goes on to say; "forgiveness recognizes what you thought your
brother did to you has not occurred. It does not pardon sins and make
them real. It sees there was no sin. And in that view are all your sins
forgiven. What is sin, except a false idea about God's Son? Forgiveness
merely sees its falsity, and therefore lets it go. What then is free to
take its place is now the Will of God."

Sin, we are told is non-existent; it is merely an illusion constructed
by the ego, and the world we see around us is an illusion constructed by
our thoughts. "The world is false perception. It is born of error, and
it has not left its source. It will remain no longer than the thought
which gave it birth is cherished."

"The only thing that is real is created by God, there is nothing else
and everything we think and feel is real in the physical world is
nothing but an illusion. What God did not create does not exist. And
everything that does exist exists as He created it. The world you see
has nothing to do with reality. It is of your own making, and it does
not exist."

Love is everything; perfect love is the goal for all of us and we simply
have to let it in; "the search for love is but the honest searching out
of everything that interferes with love." Love is the opposite of
judgement and love really does conquer all.

The original text was dictated to Schucman who sat in a trance state and
wrote down in shorthand everything the inner voice told her. Dr. William
Thetford, was Schucman's supervisor and friend at the time, and he
assisted her by typing up the text and arranging it into a coherent
document. Personal information given to Schucman and Thetford was
intentionally omitted and the 1500 pages that remained became what we
now know as *A Course In Miracles.*

In 1972 the text was sent to Hugh Lynne Cayce, son of the famous
American psychic and medical intuitive, Edgar Cayce. Cayce was
interested in the work and assisted by distributing it to a select
number of people. A later edited version was published in 1975 by "The
Foundation for Inner Peace." More than a million copies were sold around
the world and the book became a huge commercial success. In 2000 a court
case took place to establish copyright of the work and this earlier more
complete text was judged by a US court to be outside of copyright and in
the public domain. It became known as the "Hugh Lynn Cayce text."

The "Course" is essential reading for spiritual seekers, religious
followers, or anyone searching for spiritual meaning in their lives.


# **A Course in Miracles** 
This is a course in miracles. It is a required course. Only the
time you take it is voluntary. Free will does not mean that you can
establish the curriculum. It means only that you may elect what you want
to take at a given time.

The course does not aim at teaching the meaning of love, for that is
beyond what can be taught. It does aim, however, at removing the blocks
to the awareness of love's presence, which is your natural inheritance.
The opposite of love is fear, but what is all-encompassing can have no
opposite.

This course can therefore be summed up very simply in this way:
Nothing real can be threatened.
Nothing unreal exists.
Herein lies the peace of God.

## Chapter One: Introduction to Miracles
### I. Principles of Miracles


1. There is no order of difficulty among miracles. One is not
"harder" or "bigger" than another. They are all the same. All
expressions of love are maximal.

2. Miracles as such do not matter. The only thing that matters is
their Source, which is far beyond human evaluation.

3. Miracles occur naturally as expressions of love. The real
miracle is the love that inspires them. In this sense, everything that
comes from love is a miracle.

4. All miracles mean life, and God is the Giver of life. His Voice
will direct you very specifically. You will be told all you need to
know.

5. Miracles are habits and should be involuntary. They should not
be under conscious control. Consciously selected miracles can be
misguided.

6. Miracles are natural. When they do *not* occur, something has
gone wrong.

7. Miracles are everyone's right, but purification is necessary
first.

8.  Miracles are healing because they supply a lack in that they are
performed by those who temporarily have more for those who temporarily
have less.

9. Miracles are a kind of exchange. Like all expressions of love,
which are *always* miraculous in the true sense, the exchange reverses
the physical laws. They bring *more* love both to the giver *and* the
receiver.

10.  The use of miracles as spectacles to *induce* belief is wrong,
or better, is a misunderstanding of their purpose. They are really used
*for* and *by* believers.

11. Prayer is the medium of miracles. Prayer is the natural
communication of the created with the Creator. Through prayer love is
received, and through miracles love is expressed.

12.  Miracles are thoughts. Thoughts can represent lower-order or
higher-order reality. This is the basic distinction between
intellectualizing and thinking. One makes the physical and the other
creates the spiritual, and we believe in what we make or create.

13. Miracles are both beginnings and endings. They thus alter the
temporal order. They are always affirmations of rebirth which seem to go
back but really go forward. They undo the past in the present and thus
release the future.

14. Miracles bear witness to truth. They are convincing because
they arise from conviction. Without conviction they deteriorate into
magic, which is mindless and therefore destructive, or rather the
uncreative use of mind.

15. Each day should be devoted to miracles. The purpose of time is
to enable man to learn to use it constructively. Time is thus a teaching
device and a means to an end. It will cease when it is no longer useful
in facilitating learning.

16. Miracles are teaching devices for demonstrating that it is
more blessed to give than to receive. They simultaneously increase the
strength of the giver and supply strength to the receiver.

17. Miracles are the transcendence of the body. They are sudden
shifts into invisibility, away from a sense of lower-order reality. That
is why they heal.

18. A miracle is a service. It is the maximal service one
individual can render another. It is a way of loving your neighbor as
yourself. The doer recognizes his own and his neighbor's inestimable
worth simultaneously.

19. Miracles make minds one in God. They depend on cooperation
because the Sonship is the sum of all the Souls God created. Miracles
therefore rest on the laws of eternity, not of time.

20. Miracles reawaken the awareness that the spirit, not the body,
is the altar of truth. This is the recognition that leads to the healing
power of the miracle.

21. Miracles are natural expressions of total forgiveness. Through
miracles, man accepts God's forgiveness by extending it to others.

22. Miracles are associated with fear only because of the
fallacious belief that darkness can *hide.* Man believes that what he
cannot see does not exist, and his physical eyes cannot see in the dark.
This is a very primitive solution and has led to a denial of the
Spiritual eye. \[1\] The escape from darkness involves two stages:

A. The recognition that darkness *cannot* hide. This step usually
entails fear.

B. The recognition that there is nothing you *want* to hide, even
if you *could*. This step brings *escape* from fear.

23. Miracles rearrange perception and place the levels of
perception in true perspective. This heals at *all* levels because
sickness comes from confusing the levels.

24. When you have become willing to hide nothing, you will not only be
willing to enter into communion but will also understand peace and joy.
Your commitment is not yet total, and that is why you still have more to
learn than to teach. When your equilibrium stabilizes, you will be able
to teach as much as you learn, which will give you the proper balance.
Meanwhile, remember that no effort is wasted, for unless you remember
this, you cannot avail yourselves of *my* efforts, which *are*
limitless. Only eternity is real. Why not use the illusion of time
constructively?

24. Miracles enable man to heal the sick and raise the dead
because he made sickness and death himself and can abolish both. *You*
are a miracle, capable of creating in the likeness of your Creator.
Everything else is only your own nightmare and does not exist. Only the
creations of light are real.

25\. ^28^ Miracles are part of an interlocking chain of forgiveness
which, when completed, is the Atonement. This process works all the time
and in all the dimensions of time.

^29^ I am in charge of the process of Atonement, which I undertook to
begin. When you offer a miracle unto any of my brothers, you do it unto
*yourself* and me. The reason *you* come before *me* is that I do not
need miracles for my own Atonement, but I stand at the end in case you
fail temporarily. The purpose of my part in the Atonement is the
canceling out of all lacks of love which men could not otherwise
correct. The word "sin" should be changed to "lack of love" because
"sin" is a man-made word with threat connotations which he made up
himself. No *real* threat is involved anywhere. Nothing is gained by
frightening yourselves, and it is very destructive to do so.

26\. ^30^ Miracles represent *freedom* from fear. "Atoning" really means
"undoing." The undoing of fear is an essential part of the Atonement
value of miracles.

^31^ The purpose of the Atonement is to restore everything to you, or
rather to restore it to your awareness. You were given everything when
you were created, just as everyone was. When you have been restored to
the recognition of your original state, you naturally become part of the
Atonement yourself. As you share my inability to tolerate lack of love
in yourself and others, you must join the Great Crusade to correct it.
The slogan for the Crusade is "Listen, learn and *do*": Listen to my
voice, learn to undo error, and *do* something to correct it.

^32^ The power to work miracles *belongs* to you. I will provide the
opportunities to do them, but *you* must be ready and willing since you
are already able. Doing them will bring conviction in the ability since
conviction really comes through accomplishment. The ability is the
potential; the achievement is its expression; and the Atonement is the
purpose.

27\. ^33^ A miracle is a universal blessing from God through me to *all*
my brothers. It is the privilege of the forgiven to forgive.

^34^ The disciples were specifically told to be physicians of the Lord
and to heal others. They were also told to *heal themselves* and were
promised that I would never leave them or forsake them. Atonement is the
natural profession of the Children of God because they have professed
me. "Heaven and earth shall pass away" simply means that they will not
continue to exist as separate states. My word, which is the resurrection
and the light, shall not pass away because light is eternal. *You* are
the work of God, and His work is wholly lovable and wholly loving. This
is how a man *must* think of himself in his heart because this is what
he *is.*

28\. ^35^ Miracles are a means of organizing different levels of
consciousness.

^36^ Miracles come from the below or subconscious level. Revelations
come from the above or superconscious level. The conscious level is in
between and reacts to either sub- or superconscious impulses in varying
ratios. Consciousness is the level which engages in the world and is
capable of responding to both. Having no impulses from itself and being
primarily a mechanism for inducing response, it can be very wrong.

^37^ Revelation induces complete but temporary suspension of doubt and
fear. It represents the original form of communication between God and
His Souls, involving an extremely personal sense of closeness to
creation which man tries to find in physical relationships. Physical
closeness *cannot* achieve this. The subconscious impulses properly
induce miracles, which are genuinely interpersonal and result in real
closeness to others. This can be misunderstood by a *personally* willful
consciousness as impulses toward physical gratification.

^38^ Revelation unites Souls directly with God. Miracles unite minds
directly with each other. Neither emanates from consciousness, but both
are *experienced* there. This is essential since consciousness is the
state which induces action, though it does *not* inspire it. Man is free
to believe what he chooses, and what he *does* attests to what he
believes. The deeper levels of the subconscious *always* contain the
impulse to miracles, but man is free to fill its more superficial
levels, which are closer to consciousness, with the impulses of this
world and to identify himself with them. This results in *denying*
himself access to the miracle level underneath. In his actions, then,
his relationships also become superficial, and miracle-inspired relating
becomes impossible.

29\. ^39^ Miracles are a way of *earning* release from fear.

^40^ Revelation induces a state in which fear has *already* been
abolished. Miracles are thus a means, and revelation is an end. \[In
this sense, they work together.\] Miracles do not depend on revelation;
they *induce* it. Revelation is intensely personal and cannot actually
be translated into conscious content at all. That is why any attempt to
describe it in words is usually incomprehensible. Revelation induces
*only* experience. Miracles, on the other hand, induce \[interpersonal\]
*action.* Miracles are more useful now because of their *impersonal*
nature. In this phase of learning, working miracles is more important
because freedom from fear cannot be thrust upon you.

30\. ^41^ Miracles praise God through men. They praise God by honoring
His creations, affirming their perfection. They heal because they deny
body-identification and affirm Soul-identification. By perceiving the
spirit, they adjust the levels and see them in proper alignment. This
places the spirit at the center, where Souls can communicate directly.

31\. ^42^ Miracles should inspire gratitude, not awe. Man should thank
God for what he really is. The Children of God are very holy, and the
miracle honors their holiness.

^43^ God's creations never lose their holiness, although it can be
hidden. The miracle uncovers it and brings it into the light where it
belongs. Holiness can never be really hidden in darkness, but man can
deceive himself about it. This illusion makes him fearful because he
knows in his heart it is an illusion, and he exerts enormous efforts to
establish its reality. The miracle sets reality where it belongs.
Eternal reality belongs only to the Soul, and the miracle acknowledges
only the truth. It thus dispels man's illusions about himself and puts
him in communion with himself *and* God.

32\. ^44^ Christ inspires all miracles, which are really intercessions.
They intercede for man's holiness and make his perceptions holy. By
placing him beyond the physical laws, they raise him into the sphere of
celestial order. In *this* order, man *is* perfect.

^45^ The Soul never loses its communion with God. Only the mind *needs*
Atonement. The miracle joins in the Atonement of Christ by placing the
mind in the service of the spirit. This establishes the proper function
of the mind and corrects its errors.

33\. ^46^ Miracles honor man *because* he is lovable. They dispel
illusions about him and perceive the light in him. They thus atone for
his errors by freeing him from his own nightmares. They release him from
a prison in which he has imprisoned *himself,* and by freeing his mind
from illusions, they restore his sanity. Man's mind *can* be possessed
by illusions, but his spirit is eternally free. If a mind perceives
without love, it perceives an empty shell and is unaware of the spirit
within it. But the Atonement restores the Soul to its proper place. The
mind that serves the spirit is invulnerable.

34\. ^47^ Miracles restore the mind to its fullness. By atoning for
lack, they establish perfect protection. The strength of the Soul leaves
no room for intrusions. The forgiven are filled with the Soul, and they
forgive in return. It is the duty of the released to release their
brothers.

^48^ The forgiven *are* the means of Atonement. Those released by Christ
must join in releasing their brothers, for this is the plan of the
Atonement. Miracles are the way in which minds which serve the spirit
unite with Christ for the salvation or release of all God's creations.

35\. ^49^ Miracles are expressions of love, but it does *not* follow
that they will always have observable effects. I am the only one who can
perform miracles indiscriminately because I *am* the Atonement. You have
a *role* in the Atonement, which I will dictate *to* you. Ask *me* which
miracles you should perform. This spares you exhaustion because you will
act under direct communication.

36\. ^50^ Christ-controlled miracles are part of the Atonement, but
Christ-guidance is personal and leads to *personal* salvation. The
impersonal nature of miracles is an essential ingredient because this
enables *me* to control their distribution. Christ-guidance leads to the
highly *personal* experience of revelation. This is why it involves
*personal* choice. A guide does *not* control, but he *does* direct,
leaving the following up to you. "Lead us not into temptation" means
"guide us out of our own errors." "Take up thy cross and follow me"
means, "Recognize your errors and choose to abandon them by following my
guidance."

^51^ Remember that error cannot really threaten truth, which can
*always* withstand it. *Only* the error is really vulnerable. You are
free to establish your kingdom where you see fit, but the right choice
is inevitable if you remember this:

^52^ The Soul is in a state of grace forever.\
Man's reality is only his Soul.\
Therefore, man is in a state of grace forever.

^53^ Atonement undoes all errors in this respect and thus uproots the
*real* source of fear. Whenever God's reassurances are experienced as
threat, it is *always* because you are defending misplaced and
misdirected loyalty. That is what projection always involves. Error is
lack of love. When man projects this onto others, he *does* imprison
them, but only to the extent that he reinforces errors they have
*already* made. This makes them vulnerable to the distortions of others
since their *own* perception of themselves is distorted. The miracle
worker can *only* bless and thus undoes their distortions and frees them
from prison.

37\. ^54^ Miracles are examples of right thinking. Reality contact at
all levels becomes strong and accurate, thus permitting correct
delineation of intra- and interpersonal boundaries. As a result, the
doer's perceptions are aligned with truth as God created it.

38\. ^55^ A miracle is a correction factor introduced into false
thinking by me. It acts as a catalyst, shaking up erroneous perception
and reorganizing it properly. This places man under the Atonement
principle, where his perception is healed. Until this has occurred,
revelation of the divine order is impossible.

39\. ^56^ The Spiritual eye is the mechanism of miracles because what It
perceives *is* true. It perceives both the creations of God and the
creations of man. Among the creations of man, it can also separate the
true from the false by Its ability to perceive totally rather than
selectively. It thus becomes the proper instrument for reality testing,
which always involves the necessary distinction between the false and
the true.

40\. ^57^ The miracle dissolves error because the Spiritual eye
identifies error as false or unreal. This is the same as saying that by
perceiving light, darkness automatically disappears.

^58^ Darkness is lack of light, as sin is lack of love. It has no unique
properties of its own. It is an example of the "scarcity" fallacy, from
which *only* error can proceed. Truth is always abundant. Those who
perceive and acknowledge that they have everything have no need for
driven behavior of *any* kind.

41\. ^59^ The miracle acknowledges all men as your brothers and mine. It
is a way of perceiving the universal mark of God in them. The
specialness of God's Sons does *not* stem from exclusion but from
inclusion. *All* my brothers are special. If they believe they are
deprived of anything, their perception becomes distorted. When this
occurs, the whole family of God, or the Sonship, is impaired in its
relationships. Ultimately, every member of the family of God must
return. The miracle calls him to return because it blesses and honors
him even though he may be absent in spirit.

^60^ "God is not mocked" is not a warning but a reassurance on this
point. God *would* be mocked if any of His creations lacked holiness.
The creation *is* whole, and the mark of wholeness is holiness.

42\. ^61^ Wholeness is the perceptual content of miracles. It thus
corrects or atones for the faulty perception of lack anywhere.

^62^ Here we begin to make the fundamental distinction between miracles
and projection. The stimulus *must* precede the response and will also
determine the kind of response that is evoked. Behavior *is* response,
so that the question "response to what?" becomes crucial. Since stimuli
are identified through perception, you first perceive the stimulus and
then behave accordingly. It follows, then, that:

^63^ As ye perceive, so shall ye behave.

^64^ The Golden Rule asks you to behave toward others as you would have
them behave toward you. This means that the perception of *both* must be
accurate. The Golden Rule is the rule for appropriate behavior. You
cannot behave appropriately unless you perceive accurately, because
appropriate behavior *depends* on lack of level confusion. The presence
of level confusion *always* results in variable reality testing and
therefore in variability in behavioral appropriateness. Since you and
your neighbor are equal members of the same family, as you perceive
both, so you will behave toward both. The way to perceive for Golden
Rule behavior is to look out from the perception of your *own* holiness
and perceive the holiness of others.

^65^ The emptiness engendered by fear should be replaced by love because
love and its absence are in the same dimension, and correction cannot be
undertaken except *within* a dimension. Otherwise, there has been a
confusion of levels. Death is a human affirmation of a belief in fate,
or level confusion. That is why the Bible says, "There *is* no death"
and why I demonstrated that death does not exist. I came to fulfill the
law by *reinterpreting* it. The law itself, if properly understood,
offers only protection to man. It is those who have not yet "changed
their minds" who entered the "hellfire" concept into it.

^66^ I assure you that *I* will witness for anyone who lets me and to
whatever extent he permits it. *Your* witnessing demonstrates *your*
belief and thus strengthens it. Those who witness for me are expressing
through their miracles that they have abandoned the belief in
deprivation in favor of the abundance they have learned *belongs* to
them.

43\. ^67^ A *major* contribution of miracles is their strength in
releasing man from his misplaced sense of isolation, deprivation, and
lack.

^68^ Miracles are affirmations of Sonship, which is a state of
completion and abundance. Whatever is true and real is eternal and
*cannot* change or *be* changed. The Soul is therefore unalterable
because it is already perfect, but the mind can elect the level it
chooses to serve. The *only* limit which is put on its choice is that it
*cannot* serve two masters.

^69^ The mind, if it elects to do so, becomes a medium by which the Soul
creates along the line of its own creation. If it does not freely elect
to do so, it retains its creative *potential* but places itself under
tyrannous rather than genuinely authoritative control. As a result it
imprisons, because such are the dictates of tyrants. To change your mind
means to place it at the disposal of *true* Authority.

^70^ The miracle is thus a sign that the mind has chosen to be led by
Christ in His service. The abundance of Christ is the natural result of
choosing to follow Him. *All* shallow roots must be uprooted because
they are not deep enough to sustain you. The illusion that shallow roots
can be *deepened* and thus made to hold is one of the distortions on
which the *reversal* of the Golden Rule rests. As these false
underpinnings are given up, the equilibrium is temporarily experienced
as unstable. However, the fact is that *nothing* is less stable than an
orientation that is upside down. Nor can anything which holds it that
way be really conducive to greater stability.

44\. ^71^ Miracles arise from a miraculous state of mind. By being one,
this state of mind goes out to *anyone,* even without the awareness of
the miracle worker himself. The impersonal nature of miracles is because
the Atonement itself is one, uniting all creations with their Creator.

45\. ^72^ The miracle is an expression of an inner awareness of Christ
and the acceptance of His Atonement. The mind is then in a state of
grace and naturally becomes gracious both to the host within and the
stranger without. By bringing in the stranger, he becomes your brother.

46\. ^73^ A miracle is never lost. It touches many people you do not
even know and sometimes produces undreamed of changes in forces of which
you are not even aware. That is not your concern. The miracle will
always bless *you*.

^74^ The miracles you are *not* asked to perform have not lost their
value. They are still expressions of your own state of grace, but the
*action* aspect of the miracle should be Christ-controlled because of
His complete awareness of the whole plan. The impersonal nature of
miracle-mindedness ensures *your* grace, but only Christ is in a
position to know where grace can be *bestowed*.

47\. ^75^ Miracle-mindedness means miracle-readiness. Readiness means
that you should always keep your perceptions straight, so that you will
*always* be ready, willing, and able. These are the essentials for
"listen, learn, and do." You must be *ready* to listen, *willing* to
learn, and *able* to do. Only the last is involuntary because it is the
*application* of miracles which must be Christ-controlled. The other
two, which are the *voluntary* aspects of miracle-mindedness, *are* up
to you.

48\. ^76^ Awe is an inappropriate response to miracles.

^77^ Revelation is literally unspeakable because it is an experience of
unspeakable love. Awe should be reserved for revelation, to which it is
perfectly and correctly applicable. It is *not* appropriate for miracles
because a state of awe is worshipful. It implies that one of a lesser
order stands before a greater one. This is the case *only* when a Soul
stands before its Creator. Souls are perfect creations and experience
awe only in the Presence of the Creator of perfection.

^78^ The miracle, on the other hand, is a sign of love among equals.
Equals cannot be in awe of one another because awe implies inequality.
It is therefore an inappropriate reaction to me. An elder brother is
entitled to respect for his greater experience and a reasonable amount
of obedience for his greater wisdom. He is also entitled to love because
he *is* a brother and also to devotion if he is devoted. It is only my
devotion that entitles me to yours. There is nothing about me that *you*
cannot attain. I have nothing that does not come from God. The main
difference between us as yet is that I have *nothing else*. This leaves
me in a state of true holiness, which is only a *potential* in you.

^79^ "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" is among the most
misunderstood statements in the Bible. It does *not* mean that I am in
any way separate or different from you *except in time*, which does not
really exist at all. Actually, the quotation is more meaningful if it is
considered on a vertical rather than a horizontal axis. Regarded along
the vertical, man stands below me and I stand below God. In the process
of "rising up," I *am* higher. This is because, without me, the distance
between God and man would be too great for you to encompass.

^80^ I bridge the distance as an elder brother to man on the one hand
and as a Son of God on the other. My devotion to my brothers has placed
me in charge of the Sonship, which I can render complete only to the
extent to which I can *share* it. This may appear to contradict the
statement, "I and my Father are one," but there are still separate parts
in the statement in recognition that the Father is greater. (The
original statement was "are of one kind"). The Holy Spirit is the
bringer of revelations. Revelations are *indirectly* inspired by me
because I am close to the Holy Spirit and alert to the
revelation-readiness of my brothers. I can thus *bring* down to them
more than they can *draw* down to themselves.

49\. ^81^ The Holy Spirit is the highest communication medium. Miracles
do not involve this type of communication because they are *temporary*
communication devices. When man returns to his original form of
communication with God, the need for miracles is over. The Holy Spirit
mediates higher to lower communication, keeping the direct channel from
God to man open for revelation. Revelation is not reciprocal. It is
always *from* God *to* man. The miracle *is* reciprocal because it
involves equality.

50\. ^82^ The miracle is a learning device which lessens the need for
time. In the longitudinal or horizontal plane, the recognition of the
true equality of all the members of the Sonship appears to involve
almost endless time. However, the sudden shift from horizontal to
vertical perception which the miracle entails introduces an interval
from which the doer and the receiver *both* emerge much farther along in
time than they would otherwise have been.

^83^ The miracle thus has the unique property of shortening time by
rendering the space of time it occupies unnecessary. There is *no*
relationship between the time a miracle *takes* and the time it
*covers*. It substitutes for learning that might have taken thousands of
years. It does this by the underlying recognition of perfect equality
and holiness between the doer and the receiver on which the miracle
rests.

^84^ We said before that the miracle abolishes time. It does this by a
process of *collapsing* it and thus abolishing certain *intervals*
within it. It does this, however, *within* the larger temporal sequence.
It establishes an out-of-pattern time interval which is *not* under the
usual laws of time. Only in this sense is it timeless. By collapsing
time, it literally saves time. Much as daylight saving time does, it
rearranges the distribution of light.

51\. ^85^ The miracle is the only device which man has at his immediate
disposal for controlling time. Only revelation *transcends* time, having
nothing to do with time at all.

^86^ The miracle is much like the body in that both are learning aids
which aim at facilitating a state in which they are unnecessary. When
the Soul's original state of direct communication is reached, neither
the body nor the miracle serves any purpose. While he believes he is in
a body, however, man can choose between loveless and miraculous channels
of expression. He can make an empty shell, but he *cannot* express
nothing at all. He can wait, delay, paralyze himself, reduce his
creativity to almost nothing, and even introduce a developmental arrest
or even a regression. But he *cannot* abolish his creativity. He can
destroy his medium of communication but *not* his potential.

^87^ Man was *not* created by his own free will alone. Only what *he*
creates is his to decide. The basic decision of the miracle-minded is
not to wait on time any longer than is necessary. Time can waste as well
as be wasted. The miracle-worker, therefore, accepts the time-control
factor gladly because he recognizes that every collapse of time brings
all men closer to the ultimate *release* from time in which the Son and
the Father *are* one.

^88^ Equality does not imply homogeneity *now*. When everyone recognizes
that he has everything, individual contributions to the Sonship will no
longer be necessary. When the Atonement has been completed, *all*
talents will be shared by *all* the Sons of God. God is *not* partial.
All His Children have His total love, and *all* His gifts are freely
given to everyone alike. "Except ye become as little children" means
that, unless you fully recognize your complete dependence on God, you
cannot know the real power of the Son in his true relationship with the
Father.

^89^ You who want peace can find it only by complete forgiveness. You
never really *wanted* peace before, so there was no point in being told
how to achieve it. No learning is acquired by anyone unless he wants to
learn it and believes in some way that he *needs* it. While the concept
of lack does not exist in the creation of God, it is *very* apparent in
the creations of man. It is, in fact, the essential difference. A need
implies lack by definition. It involves the recognition that you would
be better off in a state which is somehow different from the one you are
in.

^90^ Until the "separation," which is a better term than the "fall,"
nothing was lacking. This meant that man had no needs at all. If he had
not deprived himself, he would never have experienced them. After the
separation, needs became the most powerful source of motivation for
human action. All behavior is essentially motivated by needs, but
behavior itself is not a divine attribute. The body is the mechanism for
behavior. The belief that he *could* be better off is the reason why man
has this mechanism at his disposal.

^91^ Each one acts according to the particular hierarchy of needs he
establishes for himself. His hierarchy, in turn, depends on his
perception of what he *is*---that is, what he *lacks*. A sense of
separation from God is the *only* lack he really needs to correct. This
sense of separation would never have occurred if he had not distorted
his perception of truth and thus perceived *himself* as lacking. The
concept of *any* sort of need hierarchy arose because, having made this
fundamental error, he had already fragmented himself into levels with
different needs. As he integrates *he* becomes one, and his needs become
one accordingly.

^92^ Unified need produces unified action because it produces a lack of
ambivalence. The concept of a need hierarchy, a corollary to the
original error that man can be separated from God, requires correction
at its own level before the error of perceiving levels at all can be
corrected. Man cannot behave effectively while he operates at split
levels. However, while he does, correction must be introduced from the
bottom *up*. This is because he now operates in space, where concepts
such as "up" and "down" are meaningful. Ultimately, space is as
meaningless as time. The concept is really one of space-time *belief.*

^93^ The physical world exists only because man can use it to correct
his *unbelief*, which placed him in it originally. He can never control
the effects of fear himself because he *made* fear and believes in what
he made. In attitude, then, though *not* in content, he resembles his
own Creator, Who has perfect faith in His creations *because* He created
them. Belief in a creation produces its existence. That is why a man can
believe in what no one else thinks is true. It is true for him because
it was made *by* him.

^94^ Every aspect of fear proceeds from upside-down perception. The more
truly creative devote their efforts to correcting perceptual
distortions. The neurotic devotes his to compromise. The psychotic tries
to escape by establishing the certain truth of his own errors. It is
most difficult to free him by ordinary means because he is more
consistent in his own denial of truth. The miracle, however, makes no
such distinctions. It corrects errors *because* they are errors. Thus,
the next point to remember about miracles is:

52\. ^95^ The miracle makes *no* distinction among degrees of
misperception. It is a device for perception-correction, effective quite
apart from either the degree or the direction of the error. This is its
*true* indiscriminateness.

^96^ Christ-controlled miracles are selective *only* in the sense that
they are directed towards those who can use them for *themselves*. Since
this makes it inevitable that they will extend them to others, a strong
chain of Atonement is welded. However, Christ-control takes no account
at all of the magnitude of the miracle itself because the concept of
size exists in a plane that is itself unreal. Since the miracle aims at
*restoring* the awareness of reality, it would hardly be useful if it
were bound by the laws which govern the error it aims to correct. Only
man makes this kind of mistake. It is an example of the foolish
consistency which his own false beliefs have engendered.

^97^ The power and strength of man's creative will must be understood
before the real meaning of denial can be appreciated and relinquished.
It is *not* mere negation. It is a positive miscreation. While the
miscreation is *necessarily* believed in by its maker, it does not exist
at all at the level of true creation.

53\. ^98^ The miracle compares what man has made with the higher level
creation, accepting what is *in accord* as true and rejecting the
*discord* as false. *All* aspects of fear are untrue because they do not
exist at the higher creative level, and therefore do not exist at all.
To whatever extent a man is willing to submit his beliefs to this test,
to that extent are perceptions corrected.

^99^ In sorting out the false from the true, the miracle proceeds along
the following lines:

^100^ If perfect love casts out fear,\
And if fear exists,\
Then there is not perfect love.\
But only perfect love really exists.\
If there is fear,\
It creates a state which does not exist.

^101^ Believe this and you *will* be free. Only God can establish this
solution, and *this* faith *is* His gift.

^\[1\]^ The term "Spiritual eye" is later replaced by the Holy Spirit,
and the "physical eye" becomes the ego. The emphasis on the two ways of
seeing, however, remains throughout.
:::

### II. Distortions of Miracle Impulses


^102^ You are involved in unconscious distortions which are producing a
dense cover over miracle impulses and which make it hard for them to
reach consciousness. The nature of any interpersonal relationship is
limited or defined by what you want it to *do*. Relating is a way of
achieving an outcome. The danger of defenses lies in their propensity
for holding misperceptions rigidly in place. All actions which stem from
reverse thinking are literally the behavioral expressions of those who
know not what they do. A rigid orientation can be extremely reliable,
even if it is upside-down. In fact, the more consistently upside-down it
is, the *more* reliable it is.

^103^ However, validity is still the ultimate goal, which reliability
can only serve. Hostility, triumph, vengeance, self-debasement, and all
kinds of expressions of lack of love are often very clearly seen in the
fantasies which accompany them. But it is a *profound* error to imagine
that because these fantasies are so frequent or occur so reliably that
this implies validity. Remember that while validity implies reliability,
the relationship is *not* reversible. You can be wholly reliable and
*entirely* wrong. While a reliable instrument *does* measure something,
what *use* is it unless you discover what the "something" is? This
course, then, will concentrate on validity and let reliability fall
naturally into place.

^104^ The confusion of miracle impulses with physical impulses is a
major source of perceptual distortion because it *induces*, rather than
straightens out, the basic level confusion which underlies the
perception of all those who seek happiness with the instruments of this
world. Inappropriate physical impulses (or misdirected miracle impulses)
result in conscious guilt if expressed and depression if denied. *All*
real pleasure comes from doing God's will. This is because *not* doing
it is a denial of self. *Denial* of error results in projection.
*Correction* of error brings release. "Lead us not into temptation"
means "do not let us deceive ourselves into believing that we can relate
in peace to God or to our brothers with *anything* external."

^105^ Child of God, you were created to create the good, the beautiful,
and the holy. Do not lose sight of this. The love of God for a little
while must still be expressed through one body to another because the
real vision is still so dim. Everyone can use his body best by enlarging
man's perception so he can see the *real* vision. *This* vision is
invisible to the physical eye. The ultimate purpose of the body is to
render itself unnecessary. Learning to do this is the only real reason
for its creation.

^106^ Fantasies of any kind are distorted forms of thinking because they
*always* involve twisting perception into unreality. Fantasy is a
debased form of vision. Vision and revelation are closely related, while
fantasy and projection are more closely associated because both attempt
to control external reality according to false internal needs. Twist
reality in *any* way, and you are perceiving destructively. Reality was
lost through usurpation, which in turn produced tyranny. I told you that
you are now restored to your former role in the plan of Atonement, but
you must still choose freely to devote yourselves to the greater
restoration. As long as a single slave remains to walk the earth, your
release is not complete. *Complete* restoration of the Sonship is the
only true goal of the miracle-minded.

^107^ *No* fantasies are true. They are distortions of perception by
definition. They are a means of making false associations and obtaining
pleasure from them. Man can do this only because he *is* creative. But,
although he can perceive false associations, he can never make them real
*except to himself.* Man believes in what he creates. If he creates
miracles, he will be equally strong in his belief in *them*. The
strength of *his* conviction will then sustain the belief of the miracle
receiver. And fantasies become totally unnecessary as the wholly
satisfying nature of reality becomes apparent to both.
:::

## Chapter Two: The Illusion of Separation

### I. Introduction


^2:1^ This section deals with a fundamental misuse of knowledge,
referred to in the Bible as the cause of the "fall," or separation.
There are some definitions which I asked you to take from the dictionary
which will be helpful here. They are somewhat unusual since they are not
the first definitions which are given. Nevertheless, the fact that each
of them does appear in the dictionary should be reassuring.

^2^ *Project* (verb): to extend forward or out.

*Project* (noun): a plan in the mind.

*World*: a natural grand division.

^3^ We will refer later to projection as related to both mental health
and mental illness. We have already observed that man can create an
empty shell, but he cannot create nothing at all. This emptiness
provides the screen for the misuse of projection.

^4^ The Garden of Eden, which is described as a literal garden in the
Bible, was not an actual garden at all. It was merely a mental state of
complete need-lack. Even in the literal account, it is noteworthy that
the pre-separation state was essentially one in which man needed
nothing. The "tree of knowledge" is also an overly literal figure. These
concepts need to be clarified before the real meaning of the separation,
or the "detour into fear," can be fully understood.

^5^ To "project," as defined above, is a fundamental attribute of God
which He gave to His Son. In the creation, God projected His creative
ability from Himself to the Souls He created, and He also imbued them
with the same loving will to create. The Soul has not only been fully
created but has also been created perfect. There is *no* emptiness in
it. Because of its likeness to its Creator, it is creative. No Child of
God can lose this ability because it is inherent in what he *is*, but he
*can* use it inappropriately. Whenever projection is used
inappropriately, it *always* implies that some emptiness or lack exists
and that it is in man's ability to put his *own* ideas there *instead*
of truth.

^6^ If you consider carefully what this entails, the following will
become quite apparent:

^7^ First, the assumption is implicit that what God created can be
*changed* by the mind of man.

^8^ Second, the concept that what is perfect can be rendered imperfect
or wanting is accepted.

^9^ Third, the belief that man can distort the creations of God,
*including himself,* is accepted.

^10^ Fourth, the idea that since man can create himself, the direction
of his own creation is up to *him* is implied.

^11^ These related distortions represent a picture of what actually
occurred in the separation. None of this existed before, nor does it
actually exist now. The world *was* made as "a natural grand division,"
or a projecting outward of God. That is why everything that He created
is like Him. Projection, as undertaken by God, is very similar to the
kind of inner radiance which the Children of the Father inherit from
Him. It is important to note that the term "project outward" necessarily
implies that the *real* source of projection is internal. This is as
true of the Son as of the Father.

^12^ The world, in the original connotation of the term, included both
the proper creation of man by God *and* the proper creation by man in
his right mind. The latter required the endowment of man by God with
free will because *all* loving creation is freely given. Nothing in
these statements implies any sort of level involvement or in fact
anything except one continuous line of creation in which all aspects are
of the same order.

^13^ When the "lies of the serpent" were introduced, they were
specifically called "lies" because they are not true. When man listened,
all he heard was untruth. He does not have to continue to believe what
is not true unless he chooses to do so. All of his miscreations can
literally disappear in "the twinkling of an eye" because they are merely
visual misperceptions. Man's Spiritual eye can sleep, but a sleeping eye
can still see. What is seen in dreams seems to be very real. The Bible
mentions that "a deep sleep fell upon Adam," and nowhere is there any
reference to his waking up.

^14^ The history of man in the world as he sees it has not yet been
marked by any genuine or comprehensive reawakening or rebirth. This is
impossible as long as man projects in the spirit of miscreation. It
still remains within him, however, to project as God projected His own
Spirit to him. In reality, this is his *only* choice because his free
will was given him for his own joy in creating the perfect.

^15^ All fear is ultimately reducible to the basic misperception that
man has the ability to *usurp* the power of God. It can only be
emphasized that he neither *can* nor *has been* able to do this. In this
fact lies the real justification for his escape from fear. The escape is
brought about by his acceptance of the Atonement, which places him in a
position to realize that his own errors never really occurred. When the
"deep sleep" fell upon Adam, he was in a condition to experience
nightmares *because* he was asleep. If a light is suddenly turned on
while someone is dreaming a fearful dream, he may initially interpret
the light itself as a part of his own dream and be afraid of it.
However, when he awakens the light is correctly perceived as the
*release* from the dream, which is no longer accorded reality.

^16^ It is quite apparent that this release does *not* depend on the
kind of "knowledge" which is nothing more than deceiving lies. The
knowledge which illuminates rather than obscures is the knowledge which
not only *sets* you free, but which also shows you clearly that you
*are* free. Whatever lies you may believe are of no concern to the
miracle, which can heal *any* of them with equal ease. It makes *no*
distinctions among misperceptions. Its *sole* concern is to distinguish
between truth on the one hand and all kinds of errors on the other. Some
miracles may *seem* to be of greater magnitude than others. But remember
the first point in this course---that there is *no* order of difficulty
in miracles.

^17^ In reality, you are perfectly unaffected by *all* expressions of
lack of love. These can be either from yourself *and* others or from
yourself *to* others or from others to *you*. Peace is an attribute in
*you*. You cannot find it outside. All mental illness is some form of
*external* searching. Mental health is *inner* peace. It enables you to
remain unshaken by lack of love from without and capable through your
own miracles of correcting the external conditions which proceed from
lack of love in others.
:::


### II. The Reinterpretation of Defenses

^18^ When you are afraid of *anything*, you are acknowledging its power to hurt you. Remember that where your heart is, there is your treasure
also. This means that you believe in what you *value*. If you are
afraid, you are *valuing wrongly.* Human understanding will inevitably
value wrongly and, by endowing all human thoughts with equal power, will
inevitably *destroy* peace. That is why the Bible speaks of "the peace
of God which *passeth* (human) understanding." *This* peace is totally
incapable of being shaken by human errors of *any* kind. It denies the
ability of *anything* which is not of God to affect you in *any* way.

^19^ This is the *proper* use of denial. It is not used to *hide*
anything but to *correct* error. It brings *all* error into the light,
and since error and darkness are the same, it corrects error
automatically. True denial is a powerful protective device. You can and
should deny any belief that error can hurt you. This kind of denial is
not a concealment device but a correction device. The "right mind" of
the mentally healthy *depends* on it. You can do *anything* I ask. I
have asked you to perform miracles and have made it clear that miracles
are *natural, corrective, healing, and universal*. There is nothing good
they cannot do, but they cannot be performed in the spirit of doubt.

^20^ God and the Souls He created are *completely* dependent on each
other. The creation of the Soul has already been perfectly accomplished,
but the creation *by* Souls has not. God created Souls so He could
depend on them *because* He created them perfectly. He gave them His
peace so they could not be shaken and would be unable to be deceived.
Whenever you are afraid, you *are* deceived. Your mind is *not* serving
the Soul. This literally starves the Soul by denying its daily bread.
God offers *only* mercy. *Your* words should reflect only mercy because
that is what you have received, and that is what you should *give.*

^21^ Justice is a temporary expedient or an attempt to teach man the
meaning of mercy. Its judgmental side arises only because man is capable
of *in*justice if that is what his mind creates. You are afraid of God's
Will because you have used your own will, which He created in the
likeness of His own, to *miscreate*. What you do *not* realize is that
the mind can miscreate *only* when it is *not* free. An imprisoned mind
is not free by definition. It is possessed or held back by *itself*. Its
will is therefore limited and is not free to assert itself. The real
meaning of "are of one kind," which was mentioned before, is "are of one
mind or will." When the will of the Sonship and the Father are one,
their perfect accord *is* Heaven.

^22^ Denial of error is a powerful defense of truth. You will note that
we have been shifting the emphasis from the negative to the positive use
of denial. As we have already stated, denial is not a purely negative
device; it results in positive miscreation. That is the way the mentally
ill *do* employ it. But remember a very early thought of your
own---"Never underestimate the power of denial." In the service of the
"right mind," the denial of *error* frees the mind and reestablishes the
freedom of the will. When the will is *really* free, it *cannot*
miscreate because it recognizes *only* truth.

^23^ False projection arises out of false denial, *not* out of its
proper use. My own role in the Atonement is one of *true* projection; I
can project to you the affirmation of truth. If you project error to me
or to yourself, you are interfering with the process. *My* use of
projection, which can also be yours, is *not* based on faulty denial. It
*does* involve, however, the very powerful use of the denial of errors.
The miracle worker is one who accepts my kind of denial and projection,
unites his own inherent abilities to deny and project with mine, and
imposes them back on himself and others. This establishes the total
*lack* of threat anywhere. Together we can then work for the real time
of peace, which is eternal.

^24^ The improper use of defenses is quite widely recognized, but their
proper use had not been sufficiently understood as yet. They can
*indeed* create man's perception both of himself and of the world. They
can distort or correct depending on what you use them *for.*

^25^ Denial should be directed only to error, and projection should be
reserved only for truth. You should truly give as you have truly
received. The Golden Rule can work effectively only on this basis.

^26^ Intellectualization is a term which stems from the mind-brain
confusion. "Right-mindedness" is the device which defends the *right*
mind and gives it control over the body. "Intellectualization" implies a
split, while "right-mindedness" involves healing.

^27^ Withdrawal is properly employed in the service of withdrawing from
the meaningless. It is *not* a device for escape, but for consolidation.
There *is* only One Mind.

^28^ Dissociation is quite similar. You *should* split off or dissociate
yourself from error but only in defense of integration.

^29^ Detachment is essentially a weaker form of dissociation.

^30^ Flight can be undertaken in whatever direction you choose, but note
that the concept itself implies flight *from* something. Flight from
error is perfectly appropriate.

^31^ Distantiation can be properly used as a way of putting distance
between yourself and what you *should* fly from.

^32^ Regression is an effort to return to your own original state. It
can thus be utilized to *restore*, rather than to go back to the *less*
mature.

^33^ Sublimation should be a redirection of effort to the sublime.

^34^ There are many other so-called "dynamic" concepts which are
profound errors due essentially to the misuse of defenses. Among them is
the concept of different levels of aspiration, which actually result
from level confusion. However, the main point to be understood from this
section is that you can defend truth as well as error and, in fact, much
better.

^35^ The means are easier to clarify after the value of the goal itself
is firmly established. Everyone defends his own treasure. You do not
have to tell him to do so because he will do it automatically. The real
questions still remain. *What* do you treasure, and *how much* do you
treasure it? Once you have learned to consider these two questions and
to bring them into *all* your actions as the true criteria for behavior,
I will have little difficulty in clarifying the means. You have not
learned to be consistent about this as yet. I have therefore
concentrated on showing you that the means *are* available whenever you
*ask*. You can, however, save a lot of time if you do not extend this
step unduly. The correct focus will shorten it immeasurably.

^36^ The Atonement is the *only* defense which cannot be used
destructively. That is because, while everyone must eventually join it,
it is *not* a device which was generated by man. The Atonement
*principle* was in effect long before the Atonement itself began. The
principle was love, and the Atonement itself was an *act* of love. Acts
were not necessary before the separation because the time-space belief
did not exist. It was only after the separation that the defense of
Atonement and the necessary conditions for its fulfillment were planned.

^37^ It became increasingly apparent that all of the defenses which man
can choose to use constructively *or* destructively were not enough to
save him. It was therefore decided that he needed a defense which was so
splendid that he could not misuse it, although he *could* refuse it. His
choice could not, however, turn it into a weapon of attack, which is the
inherent characteristic of all other defenses. The Atonement thus
becomes the *only* defense which is *not* a two-edged sword.

^38^ The Atonement actually began long before the crucifixion. Many
Souls offered their efforts on behalf of the separated ones, but they
could not withstand the strength of the attack and had to be brought
back. Angels came, too, but their protection did not suffice because the
separated ones were not interested in peace. They had already split
their minds and were bent on further dividing rather than reintegrating.
The levels they introduced into their minds turned against each other,
and they established differences, divisions, cleavages, dispersions, and
all the other concepts related to the increasing splits which they
produced.

^39^ Not being in their right minds, they turned their defenses from
protection to assault and acted literally insanely. It was essential to
introduce a split-proof device which could be used *only* to heal, if it
were used at all. The Atonement was built into the space-time belief in
order to set a limit on the need for the belief and ultimately to make
learning complete. The Atonement *is* the final lesson. Learning itself,
like the classrooms in which it occurs, is temporary. The ability to
learn has no value when change of understanding is no longer necessary.
The eternally creative have nothing to learn. Only after the separation
was it necessary to direct the creative forces to learning because
changed behavior had become mandatory.

^40^ Men can learn to improve their behavior and can also learn to
become better and better learners. This serves to bring them into closer
and closer accord with the Sonship, but the Sonship itself is a perfect
creation, and perfection is *not* a matter of degree. Only while there
are different degrees is learning meaningful. The "evolution" of man is
merely a process by which he proceeds from one degree to the next. He
corrects his previous missteps by stepping forward. This represents a
process which is actually incomprehensible in temporal terms because he
*returns* as he goes forward.

^41^ The Atonement is the device by which he can free himself from the
past as he goes ahead. It *undoes* his past errors, thus making it
unnecessary for him to keep retracing his steps without advancing to his
return. In this sense the Atonement saves time, but like the miracle
which serves, it does *not* abolish it. As long as there is need for
Atonement, there is need for time. But the Atonement as a completed plan
does have a unique relationship *to* time. Until the Atonement is
finished, its various phases will proceed *in* time, but the whole
Atonement stands at time's end. At this point, the bridge of the return
has been built.

^42^ The Atonement is a *total* commitment. You still think this is
associated with loss. This is the same mistake *all* the separated ones
make in one way or another. They cannot believe that a defense which
cannot attack *is* the best defense. This is what is meant by "the meek
shall inherit the earth." They will literally take it over because of
their strength. A two-way defense is inherently weak precisely *because*
it has two edges and can turn against the self very unexpectedly. This
tendency cannot be controlled *except* by miracles.

^43^ The miracle turns the defense of Atonement to the protection of the
inner self, which, as it becomes more and more secure, assumes its
natural talent of protecting others. The inner self knows itself as both
a brother *and* a Son. You know that when defenses are disrupted, there
is a period of real disorientation accompanied by fear, guilt, and
usually vacillations between anxiety and depression. This course is
different in that defenses are *not* being disrupted but
*reinterpreted,* even though you may experience it as the same thing. In
the reinterpretation of defenses, only their use for *attack* is lost.
Since this means they can be used only *one* way, they become much
stronger and much more dependable. They no longer oppose the Atonement
but greatly facilitate it.

^44^ The Atonement can only be accepted *within* you. You have perceived
it largely as *external* thus far, and that is why your experience of it
has been minimal. The reinterpretation of defenses is essential in
releasing the *inner* light. Since the separation, man's defenses have
been used almost entirely to defend himself *against* the Atonement and
thus maintain the separation. They themselves generally see this as a
need to protect the *body*. The many body fantasies with which men's
minds are engaged arise from the distorted belief that the body can be
used as a means for attaining "atonement."

^45^ Perceiving the body as a temple is only the first step in
correcting this kind of distortion. It alters part of the misperception
but not all of it. It *does* recognize, however, that the concept of
Atonement in physical terms is not appropriate. However, the next step
is to realize that a temple is not a building at all. Its *real*
holiness lies in the *inner* altar around which the building is built.
The inappropriate emphasis men have put on beautiful church buildings is
a sign of their *fear* of Atonement and their unwillingness to reach the
altar itself. The *real* beauty of the temple cannot be seen with the
physical eye. The Spiritual eye, on the other hand, cannot see the
building at all because it has perfect sight. It *can,* however, see the
altar with perfect clarity.

^46^ For perfect effectiveness, the Atonement belongs at the center of
the inner altar, where it undoes the separation and restores the
wholeness of the mind. Before the separation, the mind was invulnerable
to fear because fear did not exist. Both the separation *and* the fear
are miscreations of the mind which must be undone. This is what is meant
by "the restoration of the temple." It does not mean the restoration of
the building but the opening of the altar to receive the Atonement. This
heals the separation and places *within* man the one defense against
*all* separation mind-errors which can make him perfectly invulnerable.

^47^ The acceptance of the Atonement by everyone is only a matter of
time. In fact, both time *and* matter were created for this purpose.
This appears to contradict free will because of the inevitability of the
final decision. If you review the idea carefully, however, you will
realize that this is not true. Everything is limited in some way by the
manner of its creation. Free will can temporize and is capable of
enormous procrastination. But it cannot depart entirely from its
Creator, Who set the limits on its ability to miscreate by virtue of its
own *real* purpose.

^48^ The misuse of will engenders a situation which in the extreme
becomes altogether intolerable. Pain thresholds can be high, but they
are not limitless. Eventually everyone begins to recognize, however
dimly, that there *must* be a better way. As this recognition becomes
more firmly established, it becomes a perceptual turning-point. This
ultimately reawakens the Spiritual eye, simultaneously weakening the
investment in physical sight. The alternating investment in the two
types or levels of perception is usually experienced as conflict for a
long time and can become very acute, but the outcome is as certain as
God.

^49^ The Spiritual eye literally *cannot see* error and merely looks for
Atonement. All the solutions which the physical eyes seek dissolve in
its sight. The Spiritual eye, which looks within, recognizes immediately
that the altar has been defiled and needs to be repaired and protected.
Perfectly aware of the *right* defense, It passes over all others,
looking past error to truth. Because of the real strength of *Its*
vision, It pulls the will into Its service and impels the mind to
concur. This reestablishes the true power of the will and makes it
increasingly unable to tolerate delay. The mind then realizes with
increasing certainty that delay is only a way of increasing unnecessary
pain, which it need not tolerate at all. The pain threshold drops
accordingly, and the mind becomes increasingly sensitive to what it
would once have regarded as very minor intrusions of discomfort.

^50^ The Children of God are *entitled* to perfect comfort, which comes
from a sense of perfect trust. Until they achieve this, they waste
themselves and their true creative powers on useless attempts to make
themselves more comfortable by inappropriate means. But the real means
is *already* provided and does not involve any effort at all on their
part. Their egocentricity usually misperceives this as personally
insulting, an interpretation which obviously arises from their
misperception of themselves. Egocentricity and communion *cannot*
coexist. Even the terms are contradictory.

^51^ The Atonement is the only gift that is worthy of being offered to
the altar of God. This is because of the inestimable value of the altar
itself. It was created perfect and is entirely worthy of receiving
perfection. God *is* lonely without His Souls, and *they* are lonely
without Him. Men must learn to perceive the world as a means of
*healing* the separation. The Atonement is the *guarantee* that they
will ultimately succeed.
:::


### III. Healing as Release from Fear

^52^ The emphasis will now be on healing. The miracle is the means, the
Atonement is the principle, and healing is the result. Those who speak
of "a miracle of healing" are combining two orders of reality
inappropriately. Healing is *not* a miracle. The Atonement or the final
miracle is a *remedy*, while any type of healing is a result. The *kind*
of error to which Atonement is applied is irrelevant. Essentially, *all*
healing is the release from fear. To undertake this, you *cannot* be
fearful yourself. You do not understand healing because of your *own*
fear.

^53^ A major step in the Atonement plan is to undo error at *all*
levels. Illness, which is really "not-right-mindedness," is the result
of level confusion in the sense that it always entails the belief that
what is amiss in one level can adversely affect another. We have
constantly referred to miracles as the means of correcting level
confusion, and all mistakes must be corrected at the level on which they
occur. Only the *mind* is capable of error. The body can *act*
erroneously, but this is only because it is responding to mis-thought.
The body cannot create, and the belief that it *can*, a fundamental
error, produces all physical symptoms.

^54^ All physical illness represents a belief in magic. The whole
distortion which created magic rests on the belief that there is a
creative ability in matter which the mind cannot control. This error can
take two forms---it can be believed that the mind can miscreate *in* the
body or that the body can miscreate in the mind. If it is understood
that the mind, which is the *only* level of creation, cannot create
beyond itself, neither type of confusion need occur.

^55^ The reason only the mind can create is more obvious than may be
immediately apparent. The Soul *has been* created. The body is a
learning device for the mind. Learning devices are not lessons in
themselves. Their purpose is merely to facilitate the thinking of the
learner. The most that a faulty use of a learning device can do is to
fail to facilitate learning. It has no power in itself to introduce
actual learning errors.

^56^ The body, if properly understood, shares the invulnerability of the
Atonement to two-edged application. This is not because the body is a
miracle but because it is not *inherently* open to misinterpretation.
The body is merely a fact in human experience. Its abilities can be and
frequently are over-evaluated. However, it is almost impossible to deny
its existence. Those who do so are engaging in a particularly unworthy
form of denial. The term "unworthy" here implies simply that it is not
necessary to protect the mind by denying the unmindful. \[There is
little doubt that the mind can miscreate.\] If one denies this
unfortunate aspect of the mind's power, one is also denying the power
itself.

^57^ All material means which man accepts as remedies for bodily ills
are merely restatements of magic principles. It was the first level of
the error to believe that the body created its own illness. It is a
second misstep to attempt to heal it through non-creative agents. It
does not follow, however, that the use of these very weak corrective
devices is evil. Sometimes the illness has a sufficiently great hold
over a mind to render a person inaccessible to Atonement. In this case
it may be wise to utilize a compromise approach to mind *and* body, in
which something from the *outside* is temporarily given healing belief.

^58^ This is because the *last* thing that can help the
non-right-minded, or the sick, is an *increase* in fear. They are
already *in* a fear-weakened state. If they are inappropriately exposed
to an "undiluted" miracle, they may be precipitated into panic. This is
particularly likely to occur when upside-down perception has induced the
belief that miracles are frightening.

^59^ The value of the Atonement does not lie in the manner in which it
is expressed. In fact, if it is truly used, it will inevitably *be*
expressed in whatever way is most helpful to the receiver. This means
that a miracle, to attain its full efficacy, *must* be expressed in a
language which the recipient can understand *without* fear. It does not
follow by any means that this is the highest level of communication of
which he is capable. It *does* mean, however, that it is the highest
level of communication of which he is capable *now*. The whole aim of
the miracle is to *raise* the level of communication, not to impose
regression in the improper sense upon it.

^60^ Before miracle workers are ready to undertake their function in
this world, it is essential that they fully understand the *fear of
release*. Otherwise, they may unwittingly foster the belief that release
is imprisonment, a belief that is very prevalent. This misperception
arose from the underlying misbelief that harm can be limited to the
body. This was because of the much greater fear that the mind can hurt
itself. Neither error is really meaningful because the miscreations of
the mind do not really exist. *This* recognition is a far better
protective device than *any* form of level confusion because it
introduces correction at the level of the error.

^61^ It is essential to remember that *only* the mind can create.
Implicit in this is the corollary that correction belongs at the
*thought* level. To repeat an earlier statement and to extend it
somewhat, the Soul is already perfect and therefore does not require
correction. The body does not really exist except as a learning device
for the mind. This learning device is *not* subject to errors of its own
because it was created but is *not* creating. It should be obvious,
then, that correcting the creator or inducing it to give up its
miscreations is the only application of creative ability which is truly
meaningful.

^62^ Magic is essentially mindless or the miscreative use of the mind.
Physical medications are forms of "spells." Those who are afraid to use
the mind to heal should not attempt to do so. The very fact that they
are *afraid* has made them vulnerable to miscreation. They are therefore
likely to misunderstand any healing they might induce and, because
egocentricity and fear usually occur together, may be unable to accept
the real Source of the healing. Under these conditions, it is safer for
them to rely *temporarily* on physical healing devices because they
cannot misperceive them as their own creations. As long as their sense
of vulnerability persists, they should be preserved from even attempting
miracles.

^63^ We have already said that the miracle is an expression of
miracle-mindedness. Miracle-mindedness merely means right-mindedness in
the sense that we are now using it. The right-minded neither exalt nor
depreciate the mind of the miracle worker *or* the miracle receiver.
However, as a creative act, the miracle need not await the
right-mindedness of the receiver. In fact, its purpose is to *restore*
him to his right mind. It is essential, however, that the miracle
*worker* be in his right mind or he will be unable to reestablish
right-mindedness in someone else.

^64^ The healer who relies on his *own* readiness is endangering his
understanding. He is perfectly safe as long as he is completely
unconcerned about *his* readiness but maintains a consistent trust in
*mine*. If your miracle working propensities are not functioning
properly, it is *always* because fear has intruded on your
right-mindedness and has literally upset it (or turned it upside-down).
All forms of not-right-mindedness are the result of refusal to accept
the Atonement *for yourself.* If the miracle worker *does* accept it, he
places himself in a position to recognize that those who need to be
healed are simply those who have not realized that right-mindedness *is*
healing.

^65^ The *sole* responsibility of the miracle worker is to accept the
Atonement for himself. This means that he recognizes that mind is the
only creative level and that its errors *are* healed by the Atonement.
Once he accepts this, his mind can *only* heal. By denying his mind any
destructive potential and reinstating its purely constructive powers, he
has placed himself in a position where he can undo the level confusion
of others. The message he then gives to others is the truth that *their*
minds are similarly constructive and that *their* miscreations cannot
hurt them. By affirming this, the miracle worker releases the mind from
over-evaluating its own learning device (the body) and restores the mind
to its true position as the learner.

^66^ It should be emphasized again that the body does not learn any more
than it creates. As a learning device, it merely follows the learner,
but if it is falsely endowed with self-initiative, it becomes a serious
obstruction to the very learning it should facilitate. *Only* the mind
is capable of illumination. The Soul is already illuminated, and the
body in itself is too dense. The mind, however, can bring *its*
illumination *to* the body by recognizing that density is the opposite
of intelligence and therefore unamenable to independent learning. It is,
however, easily brought into alignment with a mind which has learned to
look beyond density toward light.

^67^ Corrective learning always begins with the awakening of the
Spiritual eye and the turning away from the belief in physical sight.
The reason this so often entails fear is because man is afraid of what
his Spiritual eye will see. We said before that the Spiritual eye cannot
see error and is capable only of looking beyond it to the defense of
Atonement. There is no doubt that the Spiritual eye *does* produce
extreme discomfort by what it sees. Yet what man forgets is that the
discomfort is *not* the final outcome of its perception. When the
Spiritual eye is permitted to look upon the defilement of the altar, it
also looks *immediately* toward the Atonement.

^68^ *Nothing* the Spiritual eye perceives can induce fear. *Everything*
that results from accurate spiritual awareness is merely channelized
toward correction. Discomfort is aroused only to bring the *need* for
correction forcibly into awareness. What the physical eye sees is *not*
corrective nor can it be corrected by *any* device which can be seen
physically. As long as a man believes in what his physical sight tells
him, *all* his corrective behavior will be misdirected. The *real*
vision is obscured because man cannot endure to see his own defiled
altar. But since the altar *has* been defiled, his state becomes doubly
dangerous unless it *is* perceived.

^69^ The fear of healing arises, in the end, from an unwillingness to
accept the unequivocal fact that healing is necessary. Man is not
willing to look on what he has done *to himself*. Healing is an ability
lent to man after the separation, before which it was completely
unnecessary. Like all aspects of the space-time belief, healing ability
is temporary. However, as long as time persists, healing is needed as a
means for human protection. This is because healing rests on charity,
and charity is a way of perceiving the perfection of another even if he
cannot perceive it himself.

^70^ Most of the loftier concepts of which man is capable now are
time-dependent. Charity is really a weaker reflection of a much more
powerful love-encompassment which is *far* beyond any form of charity
that man can conceive of as yet. Charity is essential to
right-mindedness in the limited sense in which right-mindedness can now
be attained. Charity is a way of looking at another *as if* he had
already gone far beyond his actual accomplishments in time. Since his
own thinking is faulty, he cannot see the Atonement for himself or he
would have no need for charity. The charity which is accorded him is
both an acknowledgment that he *is* weak and a recognition that he
*could be* stronger.

^71^ The way in which both of these perceptions are stated clearly
implies their dependence on time, making it quite apparent that charity
lies within the human limitations, though toward its higher levels. We
said before that only revelation transcends time. The miracle, as an
expression of true human charity, can only shorten time at most. It must
be understood, however, that whenever a man offers a miracle to another,
he is shortening the suffering of *both.* This introduces a correction
into the whole record which corrects retroactively as well as
progressively.
:::

[]{#part0007_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
### IV. Fear as Lack of Love

^72^ You believe that "being afraid" is involuntary, something beyond
your control. Yet I have told you several times that only *constructive*
acts should be involuntary. We have said that Christ-control can take
over everything that does *not* matter, while Christ-guidance can direct
everything that *does* if you so choose. Fear cannot be
Christ-controlled, but it *can* be self-controlled. It *prevents* me
from controlling it. The correction is therefore a matter of *your* will
because its presence shows that you have raised the *unimportant* to a
higher level than it warrants. You have thus brought it under *your*
will, where it does not belong. This means that *you* feel responsible
for it. The level confusion here is obvious.

^73^ The reason I cannot control fear for you is that you are attempting
to raise to the mind level the proper content of lower-order reality. I
do not foster level confusion, but *you* can choose to correct it. You
would not tolerate insane *behavior* on your part and would hardly
advance the excuse that you could not help it. Why should you tolerate
insane *thinking*? There is a confusion here which you would do well to
look at clearly. *You* believe that you are responsible for what you
*do* but *not* for what you *think*. The truth is that you *are*
responsible for what you think because it is only at this level that you
*can* exercise choice.

^74^ What you do *comes from* what you think. You cannot separate
yourself from the truth by "giving" autonomy to behavior. This is
controlled by me automatically as soon as you place what you think under
my guidance. Whenever you are afraid, it is a sure sign that you have
allowed your mind to miscreate or have *not* allowed me to guide it. It
is pointless to believe that controlling the *outcome* of mis-thought
can result in healing. When you are fearful you have willed wrongly.
This is why you feel responsible for it. You must change your *mind,*
not your behavior, and this *is* a matter of will.

^75^ You do not need guidance *except* at the mind level. Correction
belongs *only* at the level where creation is possible. The term does
not mean anything at the symptom level, where it cannot work. The
correction of fear *is* your responsibility. When you ask for release
from fear, you are implying that it is not. You should ask instead for
help in the conditions which have brought the fear about. These
conditions *always* entail a separated mind willingness. At that level,
you *can* help it. You are much too tolerant of mind wandering, thus
passively condoning its miscreations. The particular result does not
matter, but the fundamental error *does.* The correction is always the
same. Before you will to do anything, ask me if your will is in accord
with mine. If you are sure that it is, there will *be* no fear.

^76^ Fear is always a sign of strain, which arises whenever the *will*
to do conflicts with *what* you do. This situation arises in two ways:

^77^ First, you can will to do conflicting things, either simultaneously
or successively. This produces conflicted behavior, which is intolerable
to yourself because the part of the will that wants to do something
*else* is outraged.

^78^ Second, you can *behave* as you think you should but without
entirely *willing* to do so. This produces consistent behavior but
entails great strain *within* the self.

^78a^ In both cases, the will and the behavior are out of accord,
resulting in a situation in which you are doing what you do *not* will.
This arouses a sense of coercion, which usually produces rage. The rage
then invades the mind and projection in the wrong sense is likely to
follow. Depression or anxiety is virtually certain.

^79^ Remember that whenever there is fear, it is because you have not
made up your mind. Your will is split, and your behavior inevitably
becomes erratic. Correcting at the behavioral level can shift the error
from the first to the second type of strain described above but will not
obliterate the fear. It is possible to reach a state in which you bring
your will under my guidance without much conscious effort, but this
implies habit patterns which you have not developed dependably as yet.
God cannot ask more than you will. The strength to do comes from your
own undivided will to do. There is no strain in doing God's Will as soon
as you recognize that it is also your own.

^80^ The lesson here is quite simple but particularly apt to be
overlooked. I will therefore repeat it, urging you to listen. Only your
*mind* can produce fear. It does so whenever it is conflicted in what it
wills, thus producing inevitable strain because willing and doing become
discordant. This cannot be corrected by better *doing*, but it *can* be
corrected by higher *willing*.
:::

[]{#part0007_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
### V. The Correction for Lack of Love

^81^ The first corrective step is *know first* that this is an
expression of fear. Then say to yourself that you must somehow have
willed not to love or that the fear which arises from behavior-will
conflict could not have arisen, then the whole process is nothing more
than a series of pragmatic steps in the larger process of accepting the
Atonement as *the* remedy. These steps can be summarized as follows:

1\. ^82^ Know first that this is fear.

2\. ^83^ Fear arises from lack of love.

3\. ^84^ The *only* remedy for lack of love is perfect love.

4\. ^85^ Perfect love is the Atonement.

^86^ We have emphasized that the miracle, or the *expression* of the
Atonement, is always a sign of real respect *from* the worthy *to* the
worthy. This worth is re-established by the Atonement. It is obvious
then that when you are afraid, you have placed yourself in a position
where you *need* Atonement because you have done something loveless,
having willed without love. This is precisely the situation for which
the Atonement was offered. The need for the remedy inspired its
creation. As long as you recognize only the need for the remedy, you
will remain fearful. However, as soon as you *remedy* it, you have also
abolished the fear. This is how true healing occurs.

^87^ Everyone experiences fear, and no one enjoys it. Yet it would take
very little right-thinking to realize why fear occurs. Very few people
appreciate the real power of the mind, and no one remains fully aware of
it all the time. However, if anyone hopes to spare himself from fear,
there are some things he must realize and realize fully. The mind is a
very powerful creator, and it never loses its creative force. It never
sleeps. Every instant it is creating and *always* as you will. Many of
your ordinary expressions reflect this. For example, when you say,
"Don't give it a thought," you imply that if you do not think about
something, it will have no effect on you. And this is true enough.

^88^ On the other hand, many other expressions clearly illustrate the
prevailing *lack* of awareness of thought-power. For example, you say,
"Just an idle thought," and mean that the thought has no effect. You
also speak of some actions as "thoughtless," implying that if the person
had thought, he would not behave as he did. While expressions like
"think big" give some recognition to the power of thought, they still
come nowhere near the truth. You do not expect to grow when you say it
because you do not really think that you will.

^89^ It is hard to recognize that thought and belief combine into a
power surge that can literally move mountains. It appears at first
glance that to believe such power about yourself is merely arrogant, but
that is not the real reason why you do not believe it. People *prefer*
to believe that their thoughts cannot exert real control because they
are literally *afraid* of them. Many psychotherapists attempt to help
people who are afraid, say, of their death wishes by depreciating the
power of the wish. They even try to "free" the patient by persuading him
that he can think whatever he wants without any *real* effect at all.

^90^ There is a real dilemma here which only the truly right-minded can
escape. Death wishes do not kill in the physical sense, but they *do*
kill spiritual awareness. *All* destructive thinking is dangerous. Given
a death wish, a man has no choice except to *act* upon the thought or
behave *contrary* to it. He thus chooses *only* between homicide and
fear. The other possibility is that he depreciates the power of his
thought. This is the usual psychoanalytic approach. It *does* allay
guilt but at the cost of rendering thinking impotent. If you believe
that what you think is ineffectual you may cease to be overly afraid of
it, but you are hardly likely to respect it.

^91^ The world is full of examples of how man has depreciated himself
because he is afraid of his own thoughts. In some forms of insanity,
thoughts are glorified, but this is only because the underlying
depreciation was too effective for tolerance. The truth is that there
*are* no "idle" thoughts. *All* thinking produces form at some level.
The reason people are afraid of ESP and so often react against it is
because they *know* that thoughts can hurt them. Their own thoughts have
made them vulnerable.

^92^ You who constantly complain about fear still persist in creating
it. I told you before that you cannot ask *me* to release you from fear
because I *know* it does not exist, but *you* do not. If I merely
intervened between your thoughts and their results, I would be tampering
with a basic law of cause and effect, the most fundamental law there is
in this world. I would hardly help if I depreciated the power of your
own thinking. This would be in direct opposition to the purpose of this
course. It is much more helpful to remind you that you do not guard your
thoughts carefully except for a small part of the day and somewhat
inconsistently even then. You may feel at this point that it would take
a miracle to enable you to do this, which is perfectly true.

^93^ Men are not used to miraculous thinking, but they can be *trained*
to think that way. All miracle workers need that kind of training. I
cannot let them leave their minds unguarded, or they will not be able to
help me. Miracle working entails a full realization of the power of
thought and real avoidance of miscreation. Otherwise, a miracle will be
necessary to set the mind *itself* straight, a circular process which
would hardly foster the time collapse for which the miracle was
intended. Nor would it induce the healthy respect for true cause and
effect which every miracle worker must have.

^94^ Both miracles *and* fear come from thoughts, and if you were not
free to choose one, you would also not be free to choose the other. By
choosing the miracle, you *have* rejected fear. You have been afraid of
God, of me, of yourselves, and of practically everyone you know at one
time or another. This is because you have misperceived or miscreated us
and believe in what you have made. You would never have done this if you
were not afraid of your own thoughts. The vulnerable are essentially
miscreators because they misperceive creation.

^95^ You persist in believing that when you do not consciously watch
your mind, it is unmindful. It is time, however, to consider the whole
world of the unconscious or "unwatched" mind. This may well frighten you
because it is the *source* of fear. The unwatched mind is responsible
for the whole content of the unconscious which lies *above* the miracle
level. All psychoanalytic theorists have made some contribution in this
connection, but none of them has seen it in its true entirety. They have
all made one common error in that they attempted to uncover unconscious
*content*. You cannot understand unconscious activity in these terms
because "content" is applicable *only* to the more superficial
unconscious levels, to which the individual himself contributes. This is
the level at which he can readily introduce fear and usually does.

^96^ When man miscreates he is in pain. The cause and effect principle
here is temporarily a real expediter. Actually, "Cause" is a term
properly belonging to God, and "Effect," which should also be
capitalized, is His Son. This entails a set of Cause and Effect
relationships which are totally different from those which man
introduced into his own miscreations. The fundamental opponents in the
real basic conflict are creation and miscreation. *All fear* is implicit
in the second, just as all *love* is inherent in the first. Because of
this difference, the basic conflict *is* one between love and fear.

^97^ It has already been said that man believes he *cannot* control fear
because he himself created it. His belief in it seems to render it out
of his control by definition. Yet any attempt to resolve the basic
conflict through the concept of *mastery* of fear is meaningless. In
fact it asserts the *power* of fear by the simple assumption that it
*need* be mastered. The essential resolution rests entirely on the
mastery of *love*. In the interim, the *sense* of conflict is inevitable
since man has placed himself in a strangely illogical position. He
believes in the power of what does not exist.

^98^ Two concepts which *cannot* coexist are "nothing" and "everything."
To whatever extent one is believed in, the other *has been* denied. In
the conflict fear is really nothing, and love is everything. This is
because whenever light enters darkness, the darkness *is* abolished.
What man believes *is* true for him. In this sense the separation *has*
occurred, and to deny this is merely to misuse denial. However, to
concentrate on error is merely a further misuse of defenses. The true
corrective procedure is to recognize error temporarily but *only* as an
indication that *immediate* correction is mandatory. This establishes a
state of mind in which the Atonement can be accepted *without* delay.

^99^ It should be emphasized, however, that ultimately there *is* no
compromise possible between everything and nothing. Time is essentially
a device by which all compromise in this respect can be given up. It
seems to be abolished by degrees because time itself involves a concept
of intervals which do not really exist. The faulty use of creation made
this necessary as a corrective device. "And God so loved the world that
He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him shall not
perish, but have eternal life" needs only one slight correction to be
entirely meaningful in this context. It should read, "He gave it *to*
His only begotten Son."

^100^ It should especially be noted that God has only *one* Son. If all
the Souls God created *are* His Sons, then every Soul *must* be an
integral part of the whole Sonship. You do not find the concept that the
whole is greater than its parts difficult to understand. You should
therefore not have too much trouble in understanding this.

^101^ The Sonship in its oneness *does* transcend the sum of its parts.
However, this is obscured as long as any of its parts are missing. That
is why the conflict cannot ultimately be resolved until *all* the parts
of the Sonship have returned. Only then can the meaning of wholeness, in
the true sense, be fully understood.

^102^ Any part of the Sonship can believe in error or incompleteness if
he so elects. However, if he does so, he is believing in the existence
of nothingness. The correction of this error is the Atonement. We have
already briefly spoken about readiness, but there are some additional
points which might be helpful here. Readiness is nothing more than the
*prerequisite* for accomplishment. The two should not be confused. As
soon as a state of readiness occurs, there is usually some will to
accomplish, but this is by no means necessarily undivided. The state
does not imply more than a *potential* for a shift of will.

^103^ Confidence cannot develop fully until mastery has been
accomplished. We have already attempted to correct the fundamental error
that fear can be mastered and have emphasized that only *love* can be
mastered. You have attested only to your readiness. Mastery of love
involves a much more complete confidence than either of you has
attained. However, the readiness at least is an indication that you
believe this is possible. That is only the beginning of confidence. In
case this be misunderstood to imply that an enormous amount of time will
be necessary between readiness and mastery, let me remind you that time
and space are under my control.

^104^ One of the chief ways in which man can correct his magic-miracle
confusion is to remember that he did not create himself. He is apt to
forget this when he becomes egocentric, and this places him in a
position where the belief in magic in some form is virtually inevitable.
His will to create was given him by his own Creator, Who was expressing
the same will in His creation. Since creative ability rests in the mind,
everything that man creates is necessarily a matter of will. It also
follows that whatever he creates is real in his own sight but not
necessarily in the sight of God. This basic distinction leads us
directly into the real meaning of the Last Judgment.
:::

[]{#part0007_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
### VI. The Meaning of the Last Judgment

^105^ The Last Judgment is one of the greatest threat concepts in man's
perception. This is only because he does not understand it. Judgment is
not an essential attribute of God. Man brought judgment into being only
because of the separation. After the separation, however, there *was* a
place for judgment as one of the many learning devices which had to be
built into the overall plan. Just as the separation occurred over many
millions of years, the Last Judgment will extend over a similarly long
period and perhaps an even longer one. Its length depends, however, on
the effectiveness of the present speed-up.

^106^ We have frequently noted that the miracle is a device for
shortening but not abolishing time. If a sufficient number of people
become truly miracle-minded quickly, the shortening process can be
almost immeasurable. It is essential, however, that these individuals
free themselves from fear sooner than would ordinarily be the case
because they must emerge from the conflict if they are to bring peace to
other minds.

^107^ The Last Judgment is generally thought of as a procedure
undertaken by God. Actually it will be undertaken by man with my help.
It is a final healing rather than a meting out of punishment, however
much man may think that punishment is deserved. Punishment is a concept
in *total* opposition to right-mindedness. The aim of the Last Judgment
is to *restore* right-mindedness to man.

^108^ The Last Judgment might be called a process of right evaluation.
It simply means that finally all men will come to understand what is
worthy and what is not. After this, their ability to choose can be
directed reasonably. Until this distinction is made, however, the
vacillations between free and imprisoned will cannot *but* continue. The
first step toward freedom *must* entail a sorting out of the false from
the true. This is a process of division only in the constructive sense
and reflects the true meaning of the Apocalypse. Man will ultimately
look upon his own creations and will to preserve only what is good, just
as God Himself looked upon what He had created and knew that it *was*
good.

^109^ At this point, the will can begin to look with love on its own
creations because of their great worthiness. The mind will inevitably
disown its miscreations which, without the mind's belief, will no longer
exist. The term "Last Judgment" is frightening not only because it has
been falsely projected onto God, but also because of the association of
"last" with death. This is an outstanding example of upside-down
perception. Actually, if the meaning of the Last Judgment is objectively
examined, it is quite apparent that it is really the doorway to life.

^110^ No one who lives in fear is really alive. His own last judgment
cannot be directed toward himself because he is not his own creation. He
can, however, apply it meaningfully and at *any* time to everything he
has created and retain in his memory *only* what is good. This is what
his right-mindedness cannot *but* dictate. The purpose of time is solely
to "give him time" to achieve this judgment. It is his own perfect
judgment of his own creations. When everything he retains is loveable,
there is no reason for fear to remain with him. This *is* his part in
the Atonement.
:::

## Chapter Three: Retraining the Mind

### I. Introduction

^3:1^ This is a course in *mind training*. All learning involves
attention and study at some level. Some of the later parts of the course
rest too heavily on these earlier sections not to require their study.
You will also need them for preparation. Without this, you may become
much too fearful when the unexpected *does* occur to make constructive
use of it. However, as you study these earlier sections, you will begin
to see some of their implications, which will be amplified considerably
later on.

^2^ The reason a solid foundation is necessary is because of the
confusion between fear and awe to which we have already referred and
which so many people hold. You will remember that we said that awe is
inappropriate in connection with the Sons of God because you should not
experience awe in the presence of your equals. However, it was also
emphasized that awe *is* a proper reaction in the Presence of your
Creator. I have been careful to clarify my own role in the Atonement,
without either over- or understating it. I have also tried to do the
same in connection with yours. I have stressed that awe is *not* an
appropriate reaction to me because of my inherent equality.

^3^ Some of the later steps in this course, however, *do* involve a more
direct approach to God Himself. It would be most unwise to start on
these steps without careful preparation or awe will be confused with
fear, and the experience will be more traumatic than beatific. Healing
is of God in the end. The means are being carefully explained to you.
Revelation may occasionally *reveal* the end to you, but to reach it the
means are needed.
:::


### II. Special Principles For Miracle Workers

1\. ^4^ The miracle abolishes the need for lower-order concerns. Since
it is an out-of-pattern time interval, the ordinary considerations of
time and space do not apply. When *you* perform a miracle, *I* will
arrange both time and space to adjust to it.

2\. ^5^ Clear distinction between what *has been* created and what *is
being* created is essential. *All* forms of correction (or healing) rest
on this *fundamental* correction in level perception.

3\. ^6^ Another way of stating the above point is: Never confuse right-
with wrong-mindedness. Responding to *any* form of miscreation with
anything *except a desire to heal* (or a miracle) is an expression of
this confusion.

4\. ^7^ The miracle is always a *denial* of this error and an
affirmation of the truth. Only right-mindedness *can* create in a way
that has any real effect. Pragmatically, what has no real effect has no
real existence. Its effect, then, is emptiness. Being without
substantial content, it lends itself to projection in the improper
sense.

5\. ^8^ The level-adjustment power of the miracle induces the right
perception for healing. Until this has occurred, healing cannot be
understood. Forgiveness is an empty gesture unless it entails
correction. Without this it is essentially judgmental rather than
healing.

6\. ^9^ Miraculous forgiveness is *only* correction. It has *no* element
of judgment at all. "Father forgive them for they know not *what* they
do" in no way evaluates what they do. It is strictly limited to an
appeal to God to heal their minds. There is no reference to the outcome
of their mis-thought. *That* does not matter.

7\. ^10^ The biblical injunction, "Be of one mind" is the statement for
revelation-readiness. My *\>own* injunction, "Do this in remembrance of
me" is the request for cooperation from miracle workers. It should be
noted that the two statements are not in the same order of reality. The
latter involves a time awareness since to remember implies recalling the
past in the present. Time is under *my* direction, but Timelessness
belongs to God alone. In time we exist for and with each other. In
Timelessness we coexist with God.
:::


### III. Atonement Without Sacrifice

^11^ There is another point which must be perfectly clear before any
residual fear which may still be associated with miracles becomes
entirely groundless. The crucifixion did *not* establish the Atonement.
The resurrection did. This is a point which many very sincere Christians
have misunderstood. No one who is free of the scarcity-error could
*possibly* make this mistake. If the crucifixion is seen from an
upside-down point of view, it *does* appear as if God permitted and even
encouraged one of his Sons to suffer *because* he was good. Many
ministers preach this every day.

^12^ This particularly unfortunate interpretation, which arose out of
the combined misprojections of a large number of my would-be followers,
has led many people to be bitterly afraid of God. This particularly
anti-religious concept enters into many religions, and this is neither
by chance nor by coincidence. Yet the real Christian would have to pause
and ask, "How could this be?" Is it likely that God Himself would be
capable of the kind of thinking which His own words have clearly stated
is unworthy of man?

^13^ The best defense, as always, is not to attack another's position
but rather to protect the truth. It is unwise to accept *any* concept if
you have to turn a whole frame of reference around in order to justify
it. This procedure is painful in its minor applications and genuinely
tragic on a mass basis. Persecution is a frequent result, undertaken to
justify the terrible misperception that God Himself persecuted His own
Son on behalf of salvation. The very words are meaningless.

^14^ It has been particularly difficult to overcome this because,
although the error itself is no harder to overcome than any other error,
men were unwilling to give this one up because of its prominent "escape"
value. In milder forms a parent says, "This hurts me more than it hurts
you," and feels exonerated in beating a child. Can you believe that the
Father *really* thinks this way? It is so essential that *all* such
thinking be dispelled that we must be very sure that *nothing* of this
kind remains in your mind. I was *not* punished because *you* were bad.
The wholly benign lesson the Atonement teaches is lost if it is tainted
with this kind of distortion in *any* form.

^15^ "Vengeance is Mine sayeth the Lord," is a strictly karmic
viewpoint. It is a real misperception of truth by which man assigns his
own "evil" past to God. The "evil conscience" from the past has nothing
to do with God. He did not create it, and He does not maintain it. God
does *not* believe in karmic retribution. His Divine Mind does not
create that way. *He* does not hold the evil deeds of a man even against
himself. Is it likely, then, that He would hold against anyone the evil
that *another* did?

^16^ Be very sure that you recognize how utterly impossible this
assumption really is and how *entirely* it arises from misprojection.
This kind of error is responsible for a host of related errors including
the belief that God rejected man and forced him out of the Garden of
Eden. It is also responsible for the fact that you may believe from time
to time that I am misdirecting you. I have made every effort to use
words that are almost impossible to distort, but man is very inventive
when it comes to twisting symbols around.

^17^ God Himself is *not* symbolic; He is *fact*. The Atonement too is
totally without symbolism. It is perfectly clear because it exists in
light. Only man's attempts to shroud it in darkness have made it
inaccessible to the unwilling and ambiguous to the partly willing. The
Atonement itself radiates nothing but truth. It therefore epitomizes
harmlessness and sheds *only* blessing. It could not do this if it arose
from anything but perfect innocence. Innocence is wisdom because it is
unaware of evil, which does not exist. It is, however, *perfectly* aware
of *everything* that is true.

^18^ The Resurrection demonstrated that *nothing* can destroy truth.
Good can withstand *any* form of evil because light abolishes *all*
forms of darkness. The Atonement is thus the perfect lesson. It is the
final demonstration that all of the other lessons which I taught are
true. Man is released from *all* errors if he believes in this. The
deductive approach to teaching accepts the generalization which is
applicable to *all* single instances rather than building up the
generalization after analyzing numerous single instances separately. If
you can accept the *one* generalization *now*, there will be no need to
learn from many smaller lessons.

^19^ *Nothing* can prevail against a Son of God who commends his Spirit
into the hands of his Father. By doing this, the mind awakens from its
sleep and remembers its Creator. All sense of separation disappears, and
level confusion vanishes. The Son of God *is* part of the Holy Trinity,
but the Trinity itself is *One*. There is no confusion within its levels
because they are of One Mind and One Will. This single purpose creates
perfect integration and establishes the peace of God. Yet this vision
can be perceived only by the truly innocent.

^20^ Because their hearts are pure, the innocent defend true perception
instead of defending themselves *against* it. Understanding the lesson
of the Atonement, they are without the will to attack, and therefore
they see truly. This is what the Bible means when it says, "When He
shall appear (or be perceived) we shall be like Him, for we shall see
Him as He *is*."

^21^ Sacrifice is a notion totally unknown to God. It arises solely from
fear. This is particularly unfortunate because frightened people are apt
to be vicious. Sacrificing another in *any* way is a clear cut violation
of God's own injunction that man should be merciful even as his Father
in Heaven. It has been hard for many Christians to realize that this
commandment (or assignment) also applies to *themselves.* Good teachers
never terrorize their students. To terrorize is to attack, and this
results in rejection of what the teacher offers. The result is learning
failure.

^22^ I have been correctly referred to as "the Lamb of God who taketh
away the sins of the world." Those who represent the lamb as
blood-stained, an all-too-widespread error, do *not* understand the
meaning of the symbol. Correctly understood, it is a very simple parable
which merely speaks of my innocence. The lion and the lamb lying down
together refers to the fact that strength and innocence are *not* in
conflict but naturally live in peace. "Blessed are the pure in heart for
they shall see God" is another way of saying the same thing.

^23^ There has been some human controversy about the nature of seeing in
relation to the integrative powers of the brain. Correctly understood,
the issue revolves around the question of whether the body or the mind
can see (or understand). This is not really open to question at all. The
body is not capable of understanding, and only the mind can perceive
*anything*. A pure mind knows the truth, and this *is* its strength. It
cannot attack the body because it recognizes exactly what the body *is.*
This is what "a sane mind in a sane body" really means. It does *not*
confuse destruction with innocence because it associates innocence with
strength, *not* with weakness.

^24^ Innocence is *incapable* of sacrificing anything because the
innocent mind *has* everything and strives only to *protect* its
wholeness. This is why it *cannot* misproject. It can only honor man
because honor is the natural greeting of the truly loved to others who
are like them. The lamb taketh away the sins of the world only in the
sense that the state of innocence, or grace, is one in which the meaning
of the Atonement is perfectly apparent. The innocence of God is the true
state of mind of His Son. In this state, man's mind *does* see God, and
because he sees Him as he is, he knows that the Atonement, *not*
sacrifice, is the *only* appropriate gift to his *own* altar, where
nothing except perfection truly belongs. The understanding of the
innocent is *truth*. That is why their altars are truly radiant.
:::


### IV. Miracles as Accurate Perception

^25^ We have repeatedly stated that the basic concepts referred to in
this course are *not* matters of degree. Certain fundamental concepts
*cannot* be meaningfully understood in terms of coexisting polarities.
It is impossible to conceive of light and darkness, or everything and
nothing, as joint possibilities. They are all true *or* all false. It is
essential that you realize that behavior is erratic until a firm
commitment to one or the other is made.

^26^ A firm commitment to darkness or nothingness is impossible. No one
has ever lived who has not experienced *some* light and *some* thing.
This makes everyone really unable to deny truth totally, even if he
generally deceives himself in this connection. That is why those who
live largely in darkness and emptiness never find any lasting solace.
Innocence is *not* a partial attribute. It is not a real defense *until*
it is total. When it is partial, it is characterized by the same erratic
nature that holds for other two-edged defenses.

^27^ The partly innocent are apt to be quite stupid at times. It is not
until their innocence becomes a genuine viewpoint which is universal in
its application that it becomes wisdom. Innocent (or true) perception
means that you *never* misperceive and *always* see truly. More simply,
it means that you never see what does not really exist. When you lack
confidence in what someone will do, you are attesting to your belief
that he is not in his right mind. This is hardly a miracle-based frame
of reference. It also has the disastrous effect of denying the creative
power of the miracle.

^28^ The miracle perceives everything *as it is*. If nothing but the
truth exists (and this is really a redundant statement because what is
not true *cannot* exist) right-minded seeing cannot see anything *but*
perfection. We have said many times that *only* what God creates, or
what man creates with the same will, has any real existence. This, then,
is all the innocent can see. They do not suffer from the distortions of
the separated ones. The way to correct all such distortions is to
withdraw your *faith* from them and invest it *only* in what is true.

^29^ You *cannot* validate the invalid. I would suggest that you
voluntarily give up all such attempts because they can only be frantic.
If you are willing to validate what *is* true in everything you
perceive, you will make it true for *you*. Truth overcomes *all* error.
This means that if you perceive truly, you are canceling out
misperceptions in yourself *and* in others simultaneously. Because you
see them as they are, you offer them your own validation of *their*
truth. This is the healing which the miracle actively fosters.
:::


### V. Perception Versus Knowledge

^30^ We have been emphasizing perception and have said very little about
cognition as yet because you are confused about the difference between
them. The reason we have dealt so little with cognition is because you
must get your perceptions straightened out before you can *know*
anything. To know is to be certain. Uncertainty merely means that you do
*not* know. Knowledge is power *because* it is certain, and certainty is
strength. Perception is merely temporary. It is an attribute of the
space-time belief and is therefore subject to fear or love.
Misperceptions produce fear, and true perceptions produce love.
*Neither* produces certainty because *all* perception varies. That is
why it is *not* knowledge.

^31^ True perception is the *basis* for knowledge, but *knowing* is the
affirmation of truth. All your difficulties ultimately stem from the
fact that you do not recognize or *know* yourselves, each other, or God.
To recognize means to "know again," implying that you knew before. You
can see in many ways because perception involves different
interpretations, and this means that it is not whole. The miracle is a
way of perceiving, *not* of knowing. It is the right answer to a
question, and you do not ask questions at all when you know.

^32^ Questioning illusions is the first step in undoing them. The
miracle, or the "right answer," corrects them. Since perceptions
*change*, their dependence on time is obvious. They are subject to
transitory states, and this necessarily implies variability. How you
perceive at any given time determines what you *do,* and action *must*
occur in time. Knowledge is timeless because certainty is *not*
questionable. You *know* when you have *ceased* to ask questions.

^33^ The questioning mind perceives itself in time and therefore looks
for *future* answers. The unquestioning mind is closed because it
believes the future and present will be the same. This establishes an
unchanged state or stasis. It is usually an attempt to counteract an
underlying fear that the future will be *worse* than the present, and
this fear inhibits the tendency to question at all.

^34^ Visions are the natural perception of the Spiritual eye, but they
are still corrections. The Spiritual eye is symbolic and therefore not a
device for knowing. It *is*, however, a means of right perception, which
brings it into the proper domain of the miracle. Properly speaking, "a
vision of God" is a miracle rather than a revelation. The fact that
perception is involved at all removes the experience from the realm of
knowledge. That is why visions do not last.

^35^ The Bible instructs you to "*know* yourself" or *be certain*.
Certainty is *always* of God. When you love someone, you have perceived
him as he is, and this makes it possible for you to *know* him. However,
it is not until you *recognize* him that you *can* know him. While you
ask questions about God, you are clearly implying that you do *not* know
Him. Certainty does not require action. When you say that you are
*acting* on the basis of knowledge, you are really confusing perception
and cognition. Knowledge brings the mental strength for creative
*thinking* but *not* for right *doing*. Perception, miracles, and doing
are closely related. Knowledge is the result of revelation and induces
only thought. Perception involves the body, even in its most
spiritualized form. Knowledge comes from the altar within and is
timeless because it is certain. To perceive the truth is *not* the same
as knowing it.

^36^ If you attack error in one another, you will hurt yourself. You
cannot *recognize* each other when you attack. Attack is *always* made
on a stranger. You are *making* him a stranger by misperceiving him so
that you *cannot* know him. It is *because* you have made him a stranger
that you are afraid of him. *Perceive* him correctly so that you can
*know* him. Right perception is necessary before God can communicate
directly to His own altars which He has established in His Sons. There
He can communicate His certainty, and *His* knowledge will bring peace
*without* question.

^37^ God is not a stranger to His Sons, and His Sons are not strangers
to each other. Knowledge preceded both perception and time and will
ultimately replace them. That is the real meaning of the Biblical
description of God as "Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End." It
also explains the quotation, "Before Abraham was *I am.*" Perception can
and must be stabilized, but knowledge *is* stable. "Fear God and keep
his commandments" should read "*Know* God and accept His certainty."
There are no strangers in His creation. To create as He created, you can
create only what you *know* and accept as yours. God knows His Children
with perfect certainty. He created them *by* knowing them. He recognized
them perfectly. When they do not recognize each other, they do not
recognize Him.
:::


### VI. Conflict and the Ego

^38^ The abilities man now possesses are only shadows of his real
strengths. All of his functions are equivocal and open to question or
doubt. This is because he is not certain how he will *use* them. He is
therefore incapable of knowledge, being uncertain. He is also incapable
of knowledge because he can perceive lovelessly. He cannot create surely
because his perception deceives. Perception did not exist until the
separation had introduced degrees, aspects, and intervals. The Soul has
no levels, and *all* conflict arises from the concept of levels. Only
the levels of the Trinity are capable of unity. The levels which man
created by the separation cannot *but* conflict. This is because they
are essentially meaningless to each other.

^39^ Freud realized this perfectly and that is why he conceived the
different levels in his view of the psyche as forever irreconcilable.
They were conflict-prone by definition because they wanted different
things and obeyed different principles. In *our* picture of the psyche,
there is an unconscious level which properly consists *only* of the
miracle ability and which should be under *my* direction. There is also
a conscious level, which perceives or is aware of impulses from both the
unconscious and the superconscious. Consciousness is thus the level of
perception but *not* of knowledge. Again, to perceive is *not* to know.

^40^ Consciousness was the first split that man introduced into himself.
He became a *perceiver* rather than a creator in the true sense.
Consciousness is correctly identified as the domain of the ego. The ego
is a man-made attempt to perceive himself as he *wished* to be rather
than as he *is*. This is an example of the created-creator confusion we
have spoken of before. Yet man can only *know* himself as he *is*
because that is all he can be *sure* of. Everything else *is* open to
question.

^41^ The ego is the questioning compartment in the post-separation
psyche which man created for himself. It is capable of asking valid
questions but *not* of perceiving valid answers because these are
cognitive and cannot *be* perceived. The endless speculation about the
meaning of mind has led to considerable confusion because the mind *is*
confused. Only One-Mindedness is without confusion. A separated or
divided mind *must* be confused; it is uncertain by definition. It *has*
to be in conflict because it is out of accord with itself.

^42^ Intrapersonal conflict arises from the same basis as interpersonal
conflict. One part of the psyche perceives another part as on a
different level and does not understand it. This makes the parts
strangers to each other, without recognition. This is the essence of the
fear-prone condition in which attack is *always* possible. Man has every
reason to feel afraid as he perceives himself. This is why he cannot
escape from fear until he *knows* that he did not and could not create
himself. He can *never* make his misperceptions valid. His creation is
beyond his own error, and that is why he *must* eventually choose to
heal the separation.

^43^ Right-mindedness is not to be confused with the *knowing* mind
because it is applicable only to right perception. You can be
right-minded or wrong-minded, and even this is subject to degrees, a
fact which clearly demonstrates a lack of association with knowledge.
The term "right-mindedness" is properly used as the *correction* for
"wrong-mindedness," and applies to the state of mind which induces
accurate perception. It is miraculous because it *heals* misperception,
and this is indeed a miracle in view of how man perceives himself.

^44^ Perception *always* involves some misuse of will because it
involves the mind in areas of uncertainty. The mind is very active
because it has will-power. When it willed the separation, it willed to
perceive. Until then, it willed *only* to know. Afterwards it willed
ambiguously, and the only way *out* of ambiguity *is* clear perception.
The mind returns to its proper function only when it *wills to know.*
This places it in the Soul's service, where perception is meaningless.
The superconscious is the level of the mind which wills this.

^45^ The mind chose to divide itself when it willed to create both its
own levels *and* the ability to perceive, but it could not entirely
separate itself from the Soul because it is *from* the Soul that it
derives its whole power to create. Even in miscreation will is affirming
its Source or it would merely cease to be. This is impossible because it
is part of the Soul which God created and which is therefore eternal.

^46^ The ability to perceive made the body possible because you must
perceive *something* and *with* something. This is why perception
involves an exchange or translation, which knowledge does not need. The
interpretive function of perception, actually a distorted form of
creation, then permitted man to interpret the body as *himself*, which,
though depressing, was an attempt to escape from the conflict he had
induced. The superconscious, which *knows*, could not be reconciled with
this loss of power because it is incapable of darkness. This is why it
became almost inaccessible to the mind and entirely inaccessible to the
body.

^47^ Thereafter, the superconscious was perceived as a threat because
light does abolish darkness merely by establishing the fact that it is
not there. The truth will *always* overcome error in this sense. This is
not an *active* process of destruction at all. We have already
emphasized that knowledge does not *do anything*. It can be *perceived*
as an attacker, but it *cannot* attack. What man perceives as its attack
is merely his own vague recognition of the fact that it can always be
*remembered,* never having been destroyed.

^48^ God and the Souls He created remain in surety, and therefore *know*
that no miscreation exists. Truth cannot deal with unwilling error
because it does not will to be blocked out. I was a man who remembered
the Soul and its knowledge, and as a man I did not attempt to
*counteract* error with knowledge so much as to *correct* error from the
bottom up. I demonstrated both the powerlessness of the body *and* the
power of the mind. By uniting my will with that of my Creator, I
naturally remembered the Soul and its own real purpose.

^49^ I cannot unite your will with God's *for* you, but I *can* erase
all misperceptions from your mind if you will bring it under my
guidance. *Only* your misperceptions stand in your own way. Without them
your choice is certain. Sane perception *induces* sane choosing. The
Atonement was an act based on true perception. I cannot choose for you,
but I *can* help you make your own right choice. "Many are called, but
few are chosen" should read, "*All* are called, but few choose to
listen. Therefore, they do not choose *right.*"

^50^ The "chosen ones" are merely those who choose right *sooner.* This
is the real meaning of the celestial speed-up. Strong wills can do this
*now*, and you *will* find rest for your Souls. God knows you only in
peace, and this *is* your reality.
:::


### VII. The Loss of Certainty

^51^ We said before that the abilities which man possesses are only
shadows of his real strengths and that the intrusion of the ability to
perceive, which is inherently judgmental, was introduced only *after*
the separation. No one has been sure of anything since. You will also
remember, however, that I made it clear that the resurrection was the
means for the *return* to knowledge, which was accomplished by the union
of my will with the Father's. We can now make a distinction which will
greatly facilitate clarity in our subsequent statements.

^52^ Since the separation, the words "create" and "make" have been
greatly confused. When you make something, you make it out of a sense of
lack or need. Anything that is made is made for a specific purpose and
has no true generalizability. When you make something to fill a
perceived lack, which is obviously why you would want to make anything,
you are tacitly implying that you believe in separation. Knowing, as we
have frequently observed, does not lead to doing at all.

^53^ The confusion between your own creation and what *you* create is so
profound that it has become literally impossible for you to know
anything. Knowledge is always stable, and it is quite evident that human
beings are not. Nevertheless, they *are* perfectly stable as God created
them. In this sense, when their behavior is unstable they are
*disagreeing* with God's idea of the creation. Man can do this if he
chooses, but he would hardly *want* to do it if he were in his right
mind. The problem that bothers you most is the fundamental question
which man continually asks of himself, but which cannot properly be
directed to himself at all. He keeps asking himself what he *is*. This
implies that the answer is not only one which he knows but is also one
which is up to him to supply.

^54^ Man *cannot* perceive himself correctly. He *has* no image. The
word "image" is always perception-related and *not* a product of
learning. Images are symbolic and stand for something else. The current
emphasis on "changing your image" merely recognizes the power of
perception, but it also implies that there is nothing to *know*. Knowing
is *not* open to interpretation. It is possible to "interpret" meaning,
but this is always open to error because it refers to the *perception*
of meaning. Such wholly needless complexities are the result of man's
attempt to regard himself as both separated and unseparated at the same
time. It is impossible to undertake a confusion as fundamental as this
without engaging in further confusion.

^55^ Methodologically, man's mind has been very creative but, as always
occurs when method and content are separated, it has not been utilized
for anything but an attempt to escape a fundamental and entirely
inescapable impasse. This kind of thinking cannot result in a creative
outcome, although it has resulted in considerable ingenuity. It is
noteworthy, however, that this ingenuity has almost totally divorced him
from knowledge. Knowledge does not *require* ingenuity. When we say "the
truth shall set you free," we mean that all this kind of thinking is a
waste of time, but that you *are* free of the need to engage in it if
you are willing to let it go.

^56^ Prayer is a way of asking for something. Prayer is the medium of
miracles, but the only meaningful prayer is for forgiveness because
those who have been forgiven *have* everything. Once forgiveness has
been accepted, prayer in the usual sense becomes utterly meaningless.
Essentially, a prayer for forgiveness is nothing more than a request
that we may be able to *recognize* something we already have. In
electing to perceive instead of to know, man placed himself in a
position where he could resemble his Father *only* by miraculously
perceiving. He has lost the knowledge that he *himself* is a miracle.
Miraculous creation was his Source and also his real function.

^57^ "God created man in His own image and likeness" is correct in
meaning, but the words are open to considerable misinterpretation. This
is avoided, however, if "image" is understood to mean "thought" and
"likeness" is taken as "of a like quality." God *did* create the Soul in
His own Thought and of a quality like to His own. There *is* nothing
else. Perception, on the other hand, is impossible *without* a belief in
"more" and "less." Perception at every level involves selectivity and is
incapable of organization without it. In all types of perception, there
is a continual process of accepting and rejecting or organizing and
reorganizing, of shifting and changing focus. Evaluation is an essential
part of perception because judgments *must* be made for selection.

^58^ What happens to perceptions if there *are* no judgments and there
is nothing but perfect equality? Perception becomes impossible. Truth
can only be *known*. All of it is equally true, and knowing any part of
it *is* to know all of it. Only perception involves partial awareness.
Knowledge transcends *all* the laws which govern perception because
partial knowledge is impossible. It is all one and *has* no separate
parts. You who are really one with it need but know *yourself*, and your
knowledge is complete. To know God's miracle is to know Him.

^59^ Forgiveness is the healing of the perception of separation. Correct
perception *of each other* is necessary because minds have willed to see
themselves as separate. Each Soul knows God completely. That *is* the
miraculous power of the Soul. The fact that each one has this power
completely is a fact that is entirely alien to human thinking, in which
if anyone has everything, there is nothing *left*. God's miracles are as
total as His Thoughts because they *are* His Thoughts.

^60^ As long as perception lasts, prayer has a place. Since perception
rests on lack, those who perceive have not totally accepted the
Atonement and given themselves over to truth. Perception *is* a
separated state, and a perceiver *does* need healing. Communion, not
prayer, is the natural state of those who know. God and His miracles
*are* inseparable. How beautiful indeed are the Thoughts of God who live
in His light! Your worth is beyond perception because it is beyond
doubt. Do not perceive yourself in different lights. *Know* yourself in
the One Light where the miracle that is you is perfectly clear.
:::


### VIII. Judgment and the Authority Problem

^61^ We have already discussed the Last Judgment in some though
insufficient detail. After the Last Judgment there will be no more. This
is symbolic only in the sense that everyone is much better off *without*
judgment. When the Bible says, "Judge not that ye be not judged" it
merely means that if you judge the reality of others at all, you will be
unable to avoid judging your own. The choice to judge rather than to
know was the cause of the loss of peace. Judgment is the process on
which perception, but *not* cognition, rests. We have discussed this
before in terms of the selectivity of perception, pointing out that
evaluation is its obvious prerequisite.

^62^ Judgment *always* involves rejection. It is *not* an ability which
emphasizes only the positive aspects of what is judged, whether it be in
or out of the self. However, what has been perceived and rejected---or
judged and found wanting---remains in the unconscious because it *has*
been perceived. One of the illusions from which man suffers is the
belief that what he judged against has no effect. This cannot be true
unless he also believes that what he judged against does not exist. He
evidently does *not* believe this, or he would not have judged against
it. It does not matter in the end whether you judge right or wrong.
Either way, you are placing your belief in the unreal. This cannot be
avoided in any type of judgment because it implies the belief that
reality is yours to choose *from*.

^63^ You have no idea of the tremendous release and deep peace that
comes from meeting yourselves and your brothers totally without
judgment. When you recognize what you and your brothers *are,* you will
realize that judging them in *any* way is without meaning. In fact,
their meaning is lost to you precisely *because* you are judging them.
All uncertainty comes from a totally fallacious belief that you are
under the coercion of judgment. You do not need judgment to organize
your life, and you certainly do not need it to organize yourselves. In
the presence of knowledge, *all* judgment is automatically suspended,
and this is the process which enables recognition to *replace*
perception.

^64^ Man is very fearful of everything he has perceived but has refused
to accept. He believes that, because he has refused to accept it, he has
lost control over it. This is why he sees it in nightmares or in
pleasant disguises in what seem to be his happier dreams. Nothing that
you have refused to accept can be brought into awareness. It does *not*
follow that it is dangerous, but it *does* follow that you have *made*
it dangerous.

^65^ When you feel tired, it is merely because you have judged yourself
as capable of being tired. When you laugh at someone, it is because you
have judged him as debased. When you laugh at yourself, you are
singularly likely to laugh at others, if only because you cannot
tolerate the idea of being more debased than they are. All of this does
make you feel tired because it is essentially disheartening. You are not
*really* capable of being tired, but you are *very* capable of wearying
yourselves. The strain of constant judgment is virtually intolerable. It
is a curious thing that any ability which is so debilitating should be
so deeply cherished.

^66^ Yet, if you wish to be the author of reality, which is totally
impossible anyway, you *will* insist on holding onto judgment. You will
also use the term with considerable fear, believing that judgment will
someday be used against *you*. To whatever extent it *is* used against
you, it is due only to your belief in its efficacy as a weapon of
defense for your own authority. The issue of authority is really a
question of authorship. When an individual has an "authority problem,"
it is *always* because he believes he is the author of himself, projects
his delusion onto others, and then perceives the situation as one in
which people are literally fighting him for his authorship. This is the
fundamental error of all those who believe they have usurped the power
of God.

^67^ The belief is very frightening to *them* but hardly troubles God.
He is, however, eager to undo it, *not* to punish His Children, but
*only* because He knows that it makes them unhappy. Souls were *given*
their true Authorship, but men preferred to be anonymous when they chose
to separate themselves from their Author. The word "authority" has been
one of their most fearful symbols ever since. Authority has been used
for great cruelty because, being uncertain of their true Authorship, men
believe that their creation was anonymous. This has left them in a
position where it *sounds* meaningful to consider the possibility that
they must have created themselves.

^68^ The dispute over authorship has left such uncertainty in the minds
of men that some have even doubted whether they really exist at all.
Despite the apparent contradiction in this position, it is in one sense
more tenable than the view that they created themselves. At least it
acknowledges the fact that *some* true authorship is necessary for
existence.

^69^ Only those who give over all desire to reject can *know* that their
own rejection is impossible. You have *not* usurped the power of God,
but you *have* lost it. Fortunately, when you lose something, it does
not mean that the "something" has gone. It merely means that you do not
know where it is. Existence does not depend on your ability to identify
it nor even to place it. It is perfectly possible to look on reality
without judgment and merely *know* that it is there.

^70^ Peace is a natural heritage of the Soul. Everyone is free to refuse
to *accept* his inheritance, but he is *not* free to establish what his
inheritance *is.* The problem which everyone must decide is the
fundamental question of authorship. All fear comes ultimately and
sometimes by way of very devious routes from the denial of Authorship.
The offense is never to God, but only to those who deny Him. To deny His
Authorship is to deny themselves the reason for their own peace, so that
they see themselves only in pieces. This strange perception *is* the
authority problem.

^71^ There is no man who does not feel that he is imprisoned in some
way. If this is the result of his own free will, he must regard his will
as if it were *not* free, or the obviously circular reasoning involved
in his position would be quite apparent. Free will *must* lead to
freedom. Judgment *always* imprisons because it separates segments of
reality according to the highly unstable scales of desire. Wishes are
not facts by definition. To wish is to imply that willing is not
sufficient. Yet no one believes that what is wished is as real as what
is willed. Instead of, "Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven" say,
"*Will* ye first the Kingdom of Heaven," and you have said, "I know what
I am, and I will to accept my own inheritance."
:::


### IX. Creating Versus the Self-Image

^72^ Every system of thought must have a starting point. It begins with
either a making or a creating, a difference which we have discussed
already. Their resemblance lies in their power as *foundations*. Their
difference lies in what rests upon them. Both are cornerstones for
systems of belief by which men live. It is a mistake to believe that a
thought system which is based on lies is weak. *Nothing* made by a Child
of God is without power. It is essential to realize this because
otherwise you will not understand why you have so much trouble with this
course and will be unable to escape from the prisons which you have made
for yourselves.

^73^ You cannot resolve the authority problem by depreciating the power
of your minds. To do so is to deceive yourself, and this will hurt you
because you *know* the strength of the mind. You also know that you
*cannot* weaken it, any more than you can weaken God. The "devil" is a
frightening concept because he is thought of as extremely powerful and
extremely active. He is perceived as a force in combat with God,
battling Him for possession of the Souls He created. He deceives by lies
and builds kingdoms of his own in which everything is in direct
opposition to God. Yet he *attracts* men rather than repels them, and
they are seen as willing to "sell" him their Souls in return for gifts
they *recognize* are of no real worth.

^74^ This makes absolutely no sense. The whole picture is one in which
man acts in a way he *himself* realizes is self-destructive but which he
does not choose to correct and therefore perceives the cause as beyond
his control. We have discussed the fall, or separation, before, but its
meaning must be clearly understood without symbols. The separation is
not symbolic. It is an order of reality or a system of thought that is
real enough in time, though *not* in eternity. All beliefs are real to
the believer.

^75^ The fruit of only *one* tree was "forbidden" to man in his symbolic
garden. But *God* could not have forbidden it or it could not have
*been* eaten. If God knows His Children, and I assure you that He does,
would He have put them in a position where their own destruction was
possible? The "tree" which was forbidden was named the "tree of
knowledge." Yet God created knowledge and gave it freely to His
creations. The symbolism here has been given many interpretations, but
you may be sure that *any* interpretation which sees either God *or* His
creations as capable of destroying their own purpose is in error.

^76^ Eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge is a symbolic
expression for incorporating into the self the ability for
self-creating. This is the *only* sense in which God and His Souls are
*not* co-creators. The belief that they *are* is implicit in the "self
concept," a concept now made acceptable by its *weakness* and explained
by a tendency of the self to create an *image* of itself. Its fear
aspect is often ascribed to fear of retaliation by a "father figure," a
particularly curious idea in view of the fact that no one uses the term
to refer to the physical father. It refers to an *image* of a father in
relation to an *image* of the self.

^77^ Images are perceived, *not* known. Knowledge cannot deceive, but
perception *can*. Man can perceive himself as self-creating, but he
cannot do more than *believe* it. He *cannot* make it true. And, as we
said before, when you finally perceive correctly, you can only be glad
that you cannot. But until then, the belief that you *can* is the
central foundation stone in your thought system, and all your defenses
are used to attack ideas which might bring it to light. You still
believe you are images of your own creation. Your minds are split with
your Souls on this point, and there is *no* resolution while you believe
the one thing that is literally inconceivable. That is why you *cannot*
create and are filled with fear about what you make.

^78^ The mind can make the belief in separation *very* real and *very*
fearful, and this belief *is* the "devil." It is powerful, active,
destructive, and clearly in opposition to God because it literally
denies His Fatherhood. Never underestimate the power of this denial.
Look at your lives and see what the devil has made. But *know* that this
making will surely dissolve in the light of truth because its
*foundation* is a lie.

^79^ Your creation by God is the *only* foundation which cannot be
shaken because the light is *in* it. Your starting point is truth, and
you must return to this beginning. Much has been perceived since then,
but nothing else has happened. That is why your Souls are still in
peace, even though your minds are in conflict. You have not yet gone
back far enough, and that is why you become so fearful. As you approach
the beginning, you feel the fear of the destruction of your thought
system upon you, as if it were the fear of death. There *is* no death,
but there *is* a belief in death.

^80^ The Bible says that the branch that bears no fruit will be cut off
and will wither away. Be glad! The light *will* shine from the true
Foundation of Life, and your own thought system *will* stand corrected.
It *cannot* stand otherwise. You who fear salvation are *willing* death.
Life and death, light and darkness, knowledge and perception are
irreconcilable. To believe that they can be reconciled is to believe
that God and man can *not*. Only the oneness of knowledge is
conflictless. Your kingdom is not of this world because it was given you
from *beyond* this world. Only *in* this world is the idea of an
authority problem meaningful. The world is not left by death but by
truth, and truth *can* be known by all those for whom the Kingdom was
created and for whom it waits.
:::


## Chapter Four: The Root of all Evil

### I. Introduction

^4:1^ The Bible says that you should go with a brother twice as far as
he asks. It certainly does not suggest that you set him back on his
journey. Devotion to a brother cannot set *you* back either. It can lead
*only* to mutual progress. The result of genuine devotion is
inspiration, a word which properly understood is the opposite of
fatigue. To be fatigued is to be *dis*-spirited, but to be inspired is
to be in the spirit. To be egocentric *is* to be dispirited, but to be
Self-centered in the right sense is to be inspired, or in the Soul. The
truly inspired are enlightened and cannot abide in darkness.

^2^ You can speak from the Soul or from the ego, precisely as you
choose. If you speak from the Soul, you have chosen "to be still and
know that *I* am God." These words are inspired because they come from
knowledge. If you speak from the ego, you are disclaiming knowledge
instead of affirming it and are thus dispiriting yourself. Do not embark
on foolish journeys because they are indeed in vain. The ego may desire
them, but the Soul cannot embark on them because it is forever unwilling
to depart from its Foundation.

^3^ The journey to the cross should be the last foolish journey for
every mind. Do not dwell upon it, but dismiss it as accomplished. If you
can accept it as your *own* last foolish journey, you are also free to
join my resurrection. Human living has indeed been needlessly wasted in
a repetition compulsion. It reenacts the separation, the loss of power,
the foolish journey of the ego in an attempt at reparation, and finally
the crucifixion of the body or death.

^4^ Repetition compulsions can be endless unless they are given up by an
act of will. Do not make the pathetic human error of "clinging to the
old rugged cross." The only message of the crucifixion was that we can
*overcome* the cross. Unless you do so, you are free to crucify yourself
as often as you choose. But this is not the Gospel I intended to offer
you. We have another journey to undertake, and if you will read these
lessons carefully, they will help to prepare you to undertake it.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Right Teaching and Right Learning**](#part0004.html#level-19) {#part0009_split_001.html#h1-19 .level1a}

^5^ We have spoken of many different human symptoms, and at this level
there is almost endless variation. There is, however, only *one* cause
of all them. The authority problem *is* "the root of all evil." Money is
but one of its many reflections and is a reasonably representative
example of the kind of thinking which stems from it. The idea of buying
and selling implies precisely the kind of exchange that the Soul cannot
understand at all because its supply is always abundant and all its
demands are fully met.

^6^ Every symptom which the ego has made involves a contradiction in
terms. This is because the mind is split between the ego and the Soul,
so that *whatever* the ego makes is incomplete and contradictory. This
untenable position is the result of the authority problem which, because
it accepts the one inconceivable thought as its premise, can only
produce ideas which are inconceivable. The term "profess" is used quite
frequently in the Bible. To profess is to identify with an idea and
offer the idea to others to be their own. The idea does not lessen; it
becomes *stronger*.

^7^ A good teacher clarifies his own ideas and strengthens them by
teaching them. Teacher and pupil are alike in the learning process. They
are in the same order of learning, and unless they *share* their
lessons, they will lack conviction. A good teacher must believe in the
ideas which he professes, but he must meet another condition; he must
also believe in the students to whom he offers his ideas. Many stand
guard over their ideas because they want to protect their thought
systems as they are, and learning means change. Change is always fearful
to the separated ones because they cannot conceive of it as a change
towards *healing* the separation. They *always* perceive it as a change
towards further separation because the separation was their first
experience of change.

^8^ You believe that if you allow no change to enter into your ego, your
Soul will find peace. This profound confusion is possible only if one
maintains that the same thought system can stand on two foundations.
*Nothing* can reach the Soul from the ego, and nothing *from* the Soul
can strengthen the ego or reduce the conflict within it. The ego *is* a
contradiction. Man's self and God's Self *are* in opposition. They are
opposed in creation, in will, and in outcome. They are fundamentally
irreconcilable because the Soul cannot perceive and the ego cannot know.
They are therefore *not in communication* and can never *be* in
communication. Nevertheless, the ego can learn because its maker can be
misguided but *cannot* make the totally lifeless out of the life-given.
The Soul need not be taught, but the ego *must*.

^9^ The ultimate reason why learning is perceived as frightening is
because learning *does* lead to the relinquishment (*not* destruction)
of the ego to the light of the Soul. This is the change the ego *must*
fear because it does not share my charity. My lesson was like yours, and
because I learned it, I can teach it. I never attack your egos, but I
*do* try to teach you how their thought system arose. When I remind you
of your *true* creation, your egos cannot *but* respond with fear.

^10^ Teaching and learning are your greatest strengths now because you
*must* change your mind and help others change theirs. It is pointless
to refuse to tolerate change because you believe you can demonstrate
that by doing so the separation has not occurred. The dreamer who doubts
the reality of his dream while he is still dreaming is not really
healing the level-split. You *have* dreamed of a separated ego, and you
*have* believed in a world which rests upon it. This is very real to
you. You cannot undo this by doing nothing and *not* changing.

^11^ If you are willing to renounce the role of guardian of your thought
system and open it to me, I will correct it very gently and lead you
home. Every good teacher hopes to give his students so much of his own
thinking that they will one day no longer need him. This is the one real
goal of the parent, teacher, and therapist. This goal will not be
achieved by those who believe that they will *lose* their child or pupil
or patient if they succeed. It is *impossible* to convince the ego of
this because it goes against all of its own laws. But remember that laws
are set up to protect the continuity of the system in which the
law-maker *believes.*

^12^ It is natural enough for the ego to try to protect itself once you
have made it, but it is *not* natural for *you* to want to obey its laws
unless *you* believe in them. The ego cannot make this choice because of
the nature of its origin. *You* can because of the nature of *yours*.
Egos can clash in any situation, but Souls cannot clash at all. If you
perceive a teacher as merely a "larger ego," you *will* be afraid
because to *enlarge* an ego *is* to increase separation anxiety. I will
teach with you and live with you if you will think with me, but my goal
will always be to absolve you finally from the *need* for a teacher.

^13^ This is the *opposite* of the ego-oriented teacher's goal. He is
concerned with the effect of *his* ego on *other* egos and therefore
interprets their interaction as a means of ego preservation. I would not
be able to devote myself to teaching if I believed this, and *you* will
not be a devoted teacher as long as *you* maintain it. I am constantly
being perceived as a teacher either to be exalted or rejected, but I do
not accept either perception for myself.

^14^ Your worth is *not* established by your teaching *or* your
learning. Your worth was established by God. As long as you dispute
this, *everything* you do will be fearful, particularly any situation
which lends itself to the "superiority-inferiority" fallacy. Teachers
must be patient and repeat their lessons until they are learned. I am
willing to do this because I have no right to set your learning limits
for you. Once again---*nothing* you do or think or wish or make is
necessary to establish your worth. This point is not debatable except in
delusions. Your ego is *never* at stake because God did *not* create it.
Your Soul is never at stake because He *did*. *Any* confusion on this
point is a delusion and no form of devotion is possible as long as this
delusion lasts.

^15^ The ego tries to exploit *all* situations into forms of praise for
itself in order to overcome its doubts. It will be doubtful forever, or
rather as long as you believe in it. You who made it *cannot* trust it
because you *know* it is not real. The only *sane* solution is not to
try to change reality, which is indeed a fearful attempt, but to see it
as it *is. You* are part of reality, which stands unchanged beyond the
reach of your ego but within easy reach of your Soul. When you are
afraid, be still and *know* that God is real and *you* are His beloved
Son in whom He is well pleased. Do not let your ego dispute this because
the ego cannot know what is as far beyond its reach as you are.

^16^ God is *not* the author of fear. *You* are. You have chosen,
therefore, to create unlike Him, and you have made fear for yourselves.
You are not at peace because you are not fulfilling your function. God
gave you a very lofty responsibility which you are not meeting. You
*know* this, and you are afraid. In fact, your egos have chosen to be
afraid *instead* of meeting it. When you awaken you will not be able to
understand this because it is literally incredible. *Do not believe the
incredible now*. Any attempt to increase its believability is merely to
postpone the inevitable.

^17^ The word "inevitable" is fearful to the ego but joyous to the Soul.
God *is* inevitable, and you *cannot* avoid Him any more that He can
avoid *you*. The ego is afraid of the Soul's joy because, once you have
experienced it, you will withdraw all protection from the ego and become
totally without the investment in fear. Your investment is great now
because fear is a witness to the separation, and your ego rejoices when
you witness to it. Leave it behind! Do not listen to it, and do not
preserve it. Listen only to God, Who is as incapable of deception as are
the Souls He created.

^18^ Release yourselves and release others. Do not present a false and
unworthy picture of yourself to others, and do not accept such a picture
of them yourselves. The ego has built a shabby and unsheltering home for
you because it cannot build otherwise. Do not try to make this
impoverished house stand. *Its* weakness is *your* strength. Only God
could make a home that is worthy of His creations, who have chosen to
leave it empty by their own dispossession. Yet His home will stand
forever and is ready for you when you choose to enter it. Of this you
can be wholly certain. God is as incapable of creating the perishable as
the ego is of making the eternal.

^19^ Of your egos you can do nothing to save yourselves or others, but
of your Souls you can do everything for the salvation of both. Humility
is a lesson for the ego, *not* for the Soul. The Soul is beyond humility
because it recognizes its radiance and gladly sheds its light
everywhere. The meek shall inherit the earth because their egos are
humble, and this gives them better perception. The Kingdom of Heaven is
the *right* of the Soul, whose beauty and dignity are far beyond doubt,
beyond perception, and stand forever as the mark of the love of God for
His creations, who are wholly worthy of Him and *only* of Him. Nothing
else is sufficiently worthy to be a gift for a creation of God Himself.

^20^ I will substitute for your ego if you wish but *never* for your
Soul. A father can safely leave a child with an elder brother who has
shown himself responsible, but this involves no confusion about the
child's origin. The brother can protect the child's body and his ego,
which are *very* closely related, but he does not confuse *himself* with
the father because he does this, although the child may. I can be
entrusted with your body and your ego simply because this enables you
*not* to be concerned with them and lets *me* teach you their
unimportance. I could not understand their importance to *you* if I had
not once been tempted to believe in them myself.

^21^ Let us undertake to learn this lesson together, so we can be free
of them together. I need devoted teachers who share my aim of healing
the mind. The Soul is far beyond the need of your protection *or* mine.
Remember this:

^22^ In this world you need not have tribulation\
because I have overcome the world.

^23^ That is why you should be of good cheer.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Ego and False Autonomy**](#part0004.html#level-20) {#part0009_split_002.html#h1-20 .level1a}

^24^ You have asked lately how the mind could ever have made the ego.
This is a perfectly reasonable question; in fact, the best question you
could ask. There is, however, no point in giving an historical answer
because the past does not matter in human terms, and history would not
exist if the same errors were not being repeated in the present.
Abstract thought applies to knowledge because knowledge is completely
impersonal and examples are irrelevant to its understanding. Perception,
however, is always specific and therefore quite concrete.

^25^ Each man makes one ego for himself, although it is subject to
enormous variation because of its instability, and one for everyone he
perceives, which is equally variable. Their interaction is a process
which literally alters both, because they were not made either *by* or
*with* the unalterable. It is particularly important to realize that
this alteration can and does occur as readily when the interaction takes
place *in the mind* as when it involves physical presence. *Thinking*
about another ego is as effective in changing relative perception as is
physical interaction. There could be no better example of the fact that
the ego is an idea, though not a reality-based thought.

^26^ Your own present state is a good example of how the mind made the
ego. You *do* have knowledge at times, but when you throw it away, it is
as if you never had it. This willfulness is so apparent that one need
only perceive it to see that it *does* happen. If it can occur that way
in the present, why is it surprising that it occurred that way in the
past? Psychology rests on the principle of the continuity of behavior.
Surprise is a reasonable response to the unfamiliar but hardly to
something that has occurred with such persistence. I am using your
present state \[as an example\] of how the mind *can* work, provided you
fully recognize that it *need* not work that way. Why are you surprised
that something happened in the dim past when it is so clearly happening
right now?

^27^ You forget the love that animals have for their own offspring and
the need they feel to protect them. This is because they regard them as
part of themselves. No one disowns something he regards as a very real
part of himself. Man reacts to his ego much as God does to His Souls:
with love, protection, and great charity. The reaction of man to the
self he made is not at all surprising. In fact it duplicates in many
ways how he will one day react to his *real* creations, which are as
timeless as he is. The question is not *how* man responds to his ego,
but what he believes he *is*.

^28^ Belief is an ego function, and as long as your origin is open to
belief at all, you *are* regarding it from an ego viewpoint. When
teaching is no longer necessary, you will merely *know* God. Belief that
there *is* another way is the loftiest idea of which ego thinking is
capable. That is because it contains a hint of recognition that the ego
is *not* the self. Undermining the ego's thought system *must* be
perceived as painful, even though this is anything but true. Babies
scream in rage if you take away a knife or a scissors, even though they
may well harm themselves if you do not. The speed-up has placed you in
the same position.

^29^ You are *not* prepared, and in this sense you *are* babies. You
have no sense of real self-preservation and are very likely to decide
that you need precisely what would hurt you most. Whether you know it
now or not, however, you *have* willed to cooperate in a concerted and
very commendable effort to become both harm*less* and help*ful,* two
attributes which *must* go together. Your attitudes, even toward this,
are necessarily conflicted because *all* attitudes are ego-based. This
will not last. Be patient awhile and remember that the outcome is as
certain as God.

^30^ Only those who have a real and lasting sense of abundance *can* be
truly charitable. This is quite obvious when you consider the concepts
involved. To the ego, to give anything implies that you will do without
it. When you associate giving with sacrifice, then, you give only
because you believe that you are somehow getting something better so
that you can do without the thing you give. "Giving to get" is an
inescapable law of the ego, which *always* evaluates itself in relation
to other egos and is therefore continually preoccupied with the scarcity
principle which gave rise to it. This is the meaning of Freud's "reality
principle" since Freud thought of the ego as very weak and deprived,
capable of functioning *only* as a thing in need.

^31^ The "reality principle" of the ego is not real at all. The ego is
forced to perceive the "reality" of other egos because it cannot
establish the reality of *itself*. In fact, its whole perception of
other egos *as* real is only an attempt to convince itself that *it* is
real. "Self esteem" in ego terms means nothing more than that the ego
has deluded itself into accepting its reality and is therefore
temporarily less predatory. This "self esteem" is *always* vulnerable to
stress, a term which actually refers to a condition in which the
delusion of the ego's reality is threatened. This produces either ego
deflation or ego inflation, resulting in either withdrawal or attack.

^32^ The ego literally lives by comparisons. This means that equality is
beyond its grasp and charity becomes impossible. The ego *never* gives
out of abundance because it was made as a *substitute* for it. That is
why the concept of "getting" arose in the ego's thought system. All
appetites are "getting" mechanisms, representing the ego's need to
confirm itself. This is as true of bodily appetites as it is of the
so-called "higher" ego needs. Bodily appetites are *not* physical in
origin. The ego regards the body as its home and *does* try to satisfy
itself through the body, but the *idea* that this is possible is a
decision of the ego, which is completely confused about what is *really*
possible. This accounts for its erratic nature.

^33^ The ego believes it is completely on its own, which is merely
another way of describing how it originated. This is such a fearful
state that it can only turn to other egos and try to unite with them in
a feeble attempt at identification or attack them in an equally feeble
show of strength. It is *not* free, however, to consider the validity of
the premise itself because this premise is its *foundation.* The ego
*is* the belief of the mind that it is completely on its own. Its
ceaseless attempts to gain the Soul's acknowledgment and thus to
establish its own existence are utterly useless.

^34^ The Soul in its knowledge is unaware of the ego. It does not attack
it; it merely cannot conceive of it at all. While the ego is equally
unaware of the Soul, it *does* perceive itself as rejected by
"something" which is greater than itself. This is why self-esteem in ego
terms *must* be a delusion. The creations of God do not create myths,
although the creative efforts of man *can* turn to mythology. It can do
so, however, only under one condition; what man then makes is no longer
creative. Myths are entirely perceptions and are so ambiguous in form
and so characteristically good and evil in nature that the most
benevolent of them is not without fearful components, if only by
innuendo.

^35^ Myths and magic are closely associated in that myths are usually
related to the ego origins and magic to the powers which the ego
ascribes to itself. Every mythological system includes some account of
"the creation" and associates this with its particular perception of
magic. The "battle for survival" is nothing more than the ego's struggle
to preserve itself and its interpretation of its own beginning. This
beginning is always associated with physical birth because no one
maintains that the ego existed before that point in time. The
religiously ego-oriented believe that the Soul existed before and will
continue to exist afterwards, after a temporary lapse in ego life. Some
actually believe that the Soul will be punished for this lapse, even
though in reality it could not possibly know anything about it.

^36^ The term "salvation" does *not* apply to the Soul, which is not in
danger and does not need to be salvaged. Salvation is nothing more than
"right-mindedness," which is not the One-Mindedness of the Soul, but
which must be accomplished before the One-Mindedness can be restored.
Right-mindedness dictates the next step automatically because right
perception is uniformly without attack so that wrong-mindedness is
obliterated. The ego cannot survive without judgment and is laid aside
accordingly. The mind then has only *one* direction in which it can
move. The direction which the mind will take is always automatic because
it cannot *but* be dictated by the thought system to which the mind
adheres.

^37^ Every thought system has internal consistency, and this provides
the basis for the continuity of behavior. However, this is a matter of
reliability and not validity. "Reliable behavior" is a meaningful
perception as far as ego thinking goes. However, "valid behavior" is an
expression which is inherently contradictory because validity is an
*end* and behavior is a *means*. These cannot be combined logically
because when an end has been attained the means for its attainment are
no longer meaningful.

^38^ A hypothesis is either false or true, to be accepted or rejected
accordingly. If it is shown to be true, it becomes a fact, after which
no one attempts to evaluate it unless its status *as* fact is
questioned. *Every* idea to which the ego has accorded the status of
fact is questionable because facts are in the realm of knowledge.

^39^ Confusing realms of discourse is a thinking error which
philosophers have recognized for centuries. Psychologists are generally
quite deficient in this respect, as are many theologians. Data from one
realm of discourse do not mean anything in another because they can be
understood only *within* the thought system of which they are a part.
That is why psychologists are concentrating increasingly on the ego in
an attempt to unify their clearly unrelated data. It need hardly be said
that an attempt to relate the unrelated *cannot* succeed.

^40^ The more recent ecological emphases are but another ingenious way
of trying to impose order on chaos. We have already credited the ego
with considerable ingenuity, though not with creativeness. It should,
however, be remembered that inventiveness is really wasted effort, even
in its most ingenious forms. We do not have to explain *anything*. This
is why we need not trouble ourselves with inventiveness. The highly
specific nature of invention is not worthy of the abstract creativity of
God's creations.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Love Without Conflict**](#part0004.html#level-21) {#part0009_split_003.html#h1-21 .level1a}

^41^ You have never understood what "the Kingdom of Heaven is within
you" means. The reason you have not understood it is because it is *not*
understandable to the ego, which interprets it as if something outside
is inside, and this does not mean anything. The word "within" is
unnecessary. The Kingdom of Heaven *is* you. What else but you did the
Creator create, and what else *but* you is His Kingdom? This is the
whole message of the Atonement, a message which in its totality
transcends the sum of its parts. Christmas is not a time; it is a state
of mind. The Christ Mind wills from the Soul *not* from the ego, and the
Christ Mind *is* yours.

^42^ You too have a kingdom which your Soul created. It has *not* ceased
to create because your ego has set you on the road of perception. Your
Soul's creations are no more fatherless than *you* are. Your ego and
your Soul will never be co-creators, but your Soul and *your* Creator
will *always* be. Be confident that your creations are as safe as you
are.

^43^ The Kingdom is perfectly united and perfectly protected,\
and the ego will not prevail against it. Amen.

^44^ That was written in that form because it is a good thing to use as
a kind of a prayer in moments of temptation. It is a Declaration of
Independence. You will find it very helpful if you understand it fully.

^45^ In its characteristically upside-down way, the ego has taken the
impulses from the superconscious and perceives them as if they arise in
the unconscious. The ego judges what is to be accepted, and the impulses
from the superconscious are unacceptable to it because they clearly
point to the nonexistence of the ego itself. The ego therefore
experiences threat and not only censors but also reinterprets the data.
However, as Freud correctly pointed out, what you have repressed can
retain a very active life *beyond* your awareness.

^46^ Repression thus operates to conceal not only the baser impulses but
also the most lofty ones from awareness because *both* are threatening
to the ego and, being concerned primarily with its own preservation in
the face of threat, the ego perceives them *as the same*. The
threat-value of the lofty is actually much greater to the ego because
the pull of God Himself can hardly be equated with the pull of human
appetites. By perceiving them *as* the same, the ego attempts to save
itself from being swept away, as it would surely *be* in the presence of
knowledge.

^47^ The upper level of the unconscious thus contains the Call of God as
well as the call of the body. That is why the basic conflict between
love and fear is unconscious; the ego cannot tolerate either and
represses both by resorting to inhibition. Society depends on inhibiting
the latter, but *salvation* depends on *dis*inhibiting the former. The
reason you need *my* help is because you have repressed your own Guide
and therefore need guidance. My role is to separate the true from the
false in your unconscious so it can break through the barriers the ego
has set up and shine into your minds. Against our united strength, the
ego *cannot* prevail.

^48^ It should be apparent to you by now why the ego regards the Soul as
its "enemy." The ego arose from the separation, and its continued
existence depends on *your* continuing belief in the separation. Having
reduced the Soul impulses to the unconscious, the ego has to offer you
some sort of reward for maintaining this belief. All it *can* offer is a
sense of temporary existence, which begins with its *own* beginning and
ends with its *own* ending. It tells you this life is *your* existence
because it *is* its own. Against this sense of temporary existence the
Soul offers you the knowledge of permanence and unshakable *being*. No
one who has experienced the revelation of *this* can ever fully believe
in the ego again. How can its meager offering to you prevail against the
glorious gift of God?

^49^ You who identify *with* your egos cannot believe that God loves
you. *You* do not love what you have made, and what you made does not
love *you*. Being made out of the denial of the Father, the ego has no
allegiance to its own maker. You cannot conceive of the real
relationship which exists between God and His Souls because of the
hatred you have for the self *you* have made. You project onto your
*own* idea of yourself the will to separate, which conflicts with the
love you feel for what you made *because* you made it. No human love is
without this ambivalence, and since no ego has experienced love
*without* ambivalence, the concept is beyond its understanding.

^50^ Love will enter immediately into *any* mind which truly wants it,
but it *must* want it truly. This means that it wants it *without*
ambivalence, and this kind of wanting is wholly without the ego's "drive
to get." There is a kind of experience which is so different from
anything the ego can offer that you will never recover. The word
"recover" is used quite literally here---you will never be able to cover
or hide again. It is necessary to repeat here that your belief in
darkness and in hiding *is* why the light cannot enter. The Bible gives
many references to the immeasurable gifts which are *for* you but for
which *you* must ask. This is not a condition as the ego sets
conditions. It is the glorious condition of what you *are*.

^51^ No force except your own will is strong enough or worthy enough to
guide you. In this you are as free as God and must remain so forever.
You can never be bound except in honor, and that is always voluntary.
Let us ask the Father in my name to keep you mindful of His love for you
and yours for Him. He has never failed to answer this request because it
asks only for what He has already willed. Those who call truly are
*always* answered. Thou shalt have no other gods before Him because
there *are* none.

^52^ It has never really entered your mind to give up every idea you
ever had that *opposes* knowledge. You retain thousands of little scraps
of meanness which prevent the Holy One from entering. Light cannot
penetrate through the walls you make to block it, and it is forever
unwilling to destroy what you have made. No one can see *through* a
wall, but *I* can step around it. Watch your minds for the scraps of
meanness or you will be unable to ask me to do so. I can help you only
as our Father created us. I will love you and honor you and maintain
complete respect for what you have made, but I will neither honor it nor
love it unless it is true.

^53^ I will never forsake you any more than God will, but I *must* wait
as long as you choose to forsake yourself. Because I wait in love and
not in impatience, you will surely ask me truly. I will come in response
to a single unequivocal call. Watch carefully and see what it is you are
really asking for. Be very honest with yourself about this, for we must
hide nothing from each other. If you will really try to do this, you
have taken the first step toward preparing your mind for the Holy One to
enter. We will prepare for this together, for once He has come, you will
be ready to help me make other minds ready for Him. How long will you
deny Him His Kingdom?

^54^ In your own unconscious, deeply repressed by the ego, is the
declaration of your release. *God has given you everything*. This is the
one fact that means the ego does not exist and which therefore makes it
profoundly afraid. In the ego's language, remember, "to have" and "to
be" are different, but they are identical to the Soul. The Soul knows
that you both *have* everything and *are* everything. Any distinction in
this respect is meaningful only when the idea of "getting," which
implies a lack, has *already* been accepted. That is why we made no
distinction before between *having* the Kingdom of God and *being* the
Kingdom of God.

^55^ The calm being of God's Kingdom, which in your sane mind is
perfectly conscious, is ruthlessly banished from the part of the mind
which the ego rules. The ego is desperate because it opposes literally
invincible odds, whether you are asleep or awake. Consider how much
vigilance you have been willing to exert to protect your ego and how
little you have been willing to expend to protect your higher mind. Who
but the insane would undertake to believe what is not true and then
protect this belief at the *cost* of truth?
:::

[]{#part0009_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Escape From Fear**](#part0004.html#level-22) {#part0009_split_004.html#h1-22 .level1a}

^56^ If you cannot hear the Voice of God, it is because you do not
choose to listen. The fact that you *do* listen to the voice of your ego
is demonstrated by your attitudes, your feelings, and your behavior.
Your attitudes are obviously conflicted, your feelings have a narrow
range on the negative side but are never purely joyous, and your
behavior is either strained or unpredictable. Yet this is what you
*want.* This is what you are fighting to keep and what you are vigilant
to save. Your minds are filled with schemes to save the face of your
egos, and you do not seek the Face of God. The glass in which the ego
seeks to see its face is dark indeed. How can it maintain the trick of
its existence except with mirrors? But where *you* look to find yourself
is up to you.

^57^ We have said that you cannot change your mind by changing your
behavior, but we have also said, and many times before, that you *can*
change your mind. When your mood tells you that you have chosen wrongly,
and this is so whenever you are not joyous, then *know* this need not
be. In every case you have thought wrongly about some Soul that God
created and are perceiving images your ego makes in a darkened glass.
Think honestly what you have thought that God would *not* have thought
and what you have *not* thought that God would have you think. Search
sincerely for what you have done and left undone accordingly, and then
change your minds *to think with God's*.

^58^ This may seem hard to you, but it is much easier than trying to
think *against* it. Your mind *is* one with God's. Denying this and
thinking otherwise has held your ego together but has literally split
your mind. As a loving brother, I am deeply concerned with your mind and
urge you to follow my example as you look at yourselves and at each
other and see in both the glorious creations of a glorious Father.

^59^ When you are sad, *know that this need not be*. Depression *always*
arises ultimately from a sense of being deprived of something you want
and do not have. *Know* you are deprived of nothing except by your own
decisions, and then decide otherwise.

^60^ When you are anxious, *know* that all anxiety comes from the
capriciousness of the ego *and need not be.* You can be as vigilant
*against* the ego's dictates as *for* them.

^61^ When you feel guilty, *know* that the ego has indeed violated the
laws of God, but *you* have not. Leave the sins of the ego to me. That
is what Atonement is for. But until you change your mind about those
your ego has hurt, the Atonement cannot release you. As long as you feel
guilty your ego is in command because only the ego *can* experience
guilt. *This need not be.*

^62^ Watch your mind for the temptations of the ego and do not be
deceived by it. *Know* it offers you nothing. When you have given up
this voluntary dispiriting, you will see how your mind can focus and
rise above fatigue and heal. Yet you are not sufficiently vigilant
*against* the demands of the ego to disengage yourself. *This need not
be.*

^63^ The habit of engaging *with* God and His creations is easily made
if you actively refuse to let your minds slip away. The problem is *not*
one of concentration; it is the belief that no one, including yourself,
is *worth* consistent effort. Side with me *consistently* against this
deception, and do not permit this shabby belief to pull you back. The
disheartened are useless to themselves and to me, but only the ego can
*be* disheartened. Have you *really* considered how many opportunities
you have to gladden yourselves and how many of them you have refused?
There is no limit to the power of a Son of God, but he himself can limit
the expression of his power as much as he chooses.

^64^ Your mind and mine can unite in shining your ego away and releasing
the strength of God into everything you think and will and do. Do not
settle for anything *less* than this, and refuse to accept anything
*but* this as your goal. Watch your minds carefully for *any* beliefs
that hinder its accomplishment, and step away from them. Judge how well
you have done this by your own feelings, for this is the one *right* use
of judgment. Judgment, like any other defense, can be used to attack or
protect, to hurt or to heal. The ego *should* be brought to your
judgment and found wanting there. Without your own allegiance,
protection, and love, it cannot exist. Judge your ego truly and you
*must* withdraw allegiance, protection, and love from it.

^65^ You are mirrors of truth in which God Himself shines in perfect
light. To the ego's dark glass you need but say, "I will not look there
because I *know* these images are not true." Then let the Holy One shine
on you in peace, knowing that this and *only* this must be. His Mind
shone on you in your creation and brought *your* mind into being. His
Mind still shines on you and must shine *through* you. Your ego cannot
prevent *Him* from shining on you, but it *can* prevent you from letting
Him shine *through* you.

^66^ The first coming of Christ is just another name for the creation,
for Christ is the Son of God. The *second* coming of Christ means
nothing more than the end of the ego's rule over part of the minds of
men and the healing of the mind. I was created like you in the first,
and I have called you to join with me in the second. If you will think
over your lives, you will see how carefully the preparations were made.
I am in charge of the second coming, and my judgment, which is used only
for protection, cannot be wrong because it *never* attacks. *Yours* is
so distorted that you believe I was mistaken in choosing you. I assure
you this is a mistake of your egos. Do *not* mistake it for humility.

^67^ Your egos are trying to convince you that *they* are real and *I*
am not because, if *I* am real, I am no more real than *you* are. That
knowledge, and I assure you that it *is* knowledge, means that Christ
must come into your minds and heal them. Although I am *not* attacking
your egos, I *am* working with your higher mind whether you are asleep
or awake, just as your ego does with your lower mind. I am your
vigilance in this because you are too confused to recognize your own
hope. I was *not* mistaken. Your minds *will* elect to join with mine,
and together we are invincible.

^68^ You will yet come together in my name, and your sanity will be
restored. I raised the dead by *knowing* that life is an eternal
attribute of everything that the living God created. Why do you believe
it is harder for me to inspire the dispirited or to stabilize the
unstable? *I* do not believe that there is an order of difficulty in
miracles; *you* do. I have called, and you will answer. I *know* that
miracles are natural because they are expressions of love. My calling
you is as natural as your answer and as inevitable.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Ego-Body Illusion**](#part0004.html#level-23) {#part0009_split_005.html#h1-23 .level1a}

^69^ *All* things work together for good. There are *no* exceptions
except in the ego's judgment. Control is a central factor in what the
ego permits into consciousness and one to which it devotes its maximum
vigilance. This is *not* the way a balanced mind holds together. *Its*
control is unconscious. The ego is further off balance by keeping its
primary *motivation* unconscious and raising control rather than
sensible judgment to predominance. The ego has every reason to do this
according to the thought system which gave rise to it and which it
serves. Sane judgment would inevitably judge *against* the ego and must
be obliterated by the ego in the interest of its self-preservation.

^70^ A major source of the ego's off-balanced state is its lack of
discrimination between impulses from God and from the body. Any thought
system which makes this confusion *must* be insane. Yet this demented
state is *essential* to the ego, which judges only in terms of threat or
non-threat *to itself.* In one sense the ego's fear of the idea of God
is at least logical since this idea *does* dispel the ego. Fear of
dissolution from the Higher Source, then, makes *some* sense in
ego-terms. But fear of the body, with which the ego identifies so
closely, is more blatantly senseless.

^71^ The body is the ego's home by its own election. It is the only
identification with which the ego feels safe because the body's
vulnerability is its own best argument that you *cannot* be of God. This
is the belief that the ego sponsors eagerly. Yet the ego hates the body
because it does not accept the idea that the body is *good* enough to be
its home. Here is where the mind becomes actually dazed. Being told by
the ego that it is really part of the body and that the body is its
protector, the mind is also constantly informed that the body can *not*
protect it. This, of course, is not only accurate but perfectly obvious.

^72^ Therefore the mind asks, "Where can I go for protection?" to which
the ego replies, "Turn to me." The mind, and not without cause, reminds
the ego that it has itself insisted that it *is* identified with the
body, so there is no point in turning to it for protection. The ego has
no real answer to this because there *is* none, but it *does* have a
typical solution. It obliterates the *question* from the mind's
awareness. Once unconscious, the question can and does produce
uneasiness, but it cannot be answered because it cannot be *asked*. This
is the question which *must* be asked: "Where am I to go for
protection?" Even the insane ask it unconsciously, but it requires real
sanity to ask it consciously.

^73^ When the Bible says, "Seek and ye shall find," it does not mean
that you should seek blindly and desperately for something you would not
recognize. Meaningful seeking is consciously undertaken, consciously
organized, and consciously directed. The goal must be formulated clearly
*and kept in mind*. As a teacher with some experience, let me remind you
that learning and *wanting* to learn are inseparable. All learners learn
best when they believe that what they are trying to learn is of *value*
to them. However, values in this world are hierarchical, and not
everything you may want to learn has lasting value.

^74^ Indeed, many of the things you want to learn are chosen *because*
their value will not last. The ego thinks it is an advantage not to
commit itself to *anything* that is eternal because the eternal *must*
come from God. Eternalness is the one function which the ego has tried
to develop but has systematically failed. It may surprise you to learn
that had the ego wished to do so it could have made the eternal because,
as a product of the mind, it *is* endowed with the power of its own
creator. However, the *decision* to do this, rather than the ability to
do it, is what the ego cannot tolerate. That is because the decision,
from which the ability would naturally develop, would necessarily
involve accurate perception, a state of clarity which the ego, fearful
of being judged truly, *must* avoid.

^75^ The results of this dilemma are peculiar, but no more so than the
dilemma itself. The ego has reacted characteristically here as elsewhere
because mental illness, which is *always* a form of ego involvement, is
not a matter of reliability as much as of validity. The ego compromises
with the issue of the eternal, just as it does with all issues that
touch on the real question in any way. By compromising in connection
with all *tangential* questions, it hopes to hide the real question *and
keep it out of mind*. The ego's characteristic busyness with
non-essentials is for precisely that purpose.

^76^ Consider the alchemist's age-old attempts to turn base metal into
gold. The one question which the alchemist did not permit himself to ask
was, "What *for*?" He could not ask this because it would immediately
become apparent that there was no sense in his efforts even if he
succeeded. If gold became more plentiful, its value would decrease, and
his own purpose would be defeated. The ego has countenanced some strange
compromises with the idea of the eternal, making many odd attempts to
relate the concept to the *un*important in an effort to satisfy the mind
without jeopardizing itself. Thus, it has permitted minds to devote
themselves to the possibility of perpetual *motion*, but *not* to
perpetual thoughts.

^77^ Ideational preoccupations with problems set up to be incapable of
solution are also favorite ego devices for impeding the strong-willed
from making real learning progress. The problems of squaring the circle
and carrying pi to infinity are good examples. A more recent ego attempt
is particularly noteworthy. The idea of preserving the *body* by
suspension, thus giving it the kind of limited immortality which the ego
can tolerate, is among its more recent appeals to the mind. It is
noticeable, however, that in all these diversionary tactics, the one
question which is *never* asked by those who pursue them is, "What
*for*?"

^78^ This is the question which *you* must learn to ask in connection
with *everything* your mind wishes to undertake. What is the purpose?
Whatever it is, you cannot doubt that it will channelize your efforts
automatically. When you make a decision of purpose, then, you have made
a decision about your future effort, a decision which will remain in
effect unless you change the *decision*.

^79^ Psychologists are in a good position to realize that the ego is
capable of making and accepting as real some very distorted
associations. The confusion of sex with aggression and the resulting
behavior, which is perceived as the same for both, serves as an example.
This is "understandable" to the psychologist and does not produce
surprise. The lack of surprise, however, is *not* a sign of
understanding. It is a symptom of the psychologist's ability to accept
as reasonable a compromise which is clearly senseless---to attribute it
to the mental illness of the patient rather than his own and to limit
his questions about both the patient *and* himself to the trivial.

^80^ Such relatively minor confusions of the ego are not among its more
profound misassociations, although they do reflect them. Your egos have
been blocking the more important questions which your minds *should*
ask. You do not understand a patient while you yourselves are willing to
limit the questions you raise about *his* mind because you are also
accepting these limits for *yours*. This makes you unable to heal him
*and* yourselves. Be always unwilling to adapt to *any* situation in
which miracle-mindedness is unthinkable. That state in itself is enough
to demonstrate that the perception is wrong.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Constant State**](#part0004.html#level-24) {#part0009_split_006.html#h1-24 .level1a}

^81^ It cannot be emphasized too often that correcting perception is
merely a temporary expedient. It is necessary to do so only because
misperception is a block to knowledge, while accurate perception is a
stepping-stone *towards* it. The whole value of right perception lies in
the inevitable judgment which it entails that it *is* unnecessary. This
removes the block entirely. You may ask how this is possible as long as
you appear to be living in this world, and since this is a sensible
question, it has a sensible answer. You must be careful, however, that
you really understand the question. What *is* the "you" who are living
in this world?

^82^ Immortality is a constant state. It is as true now as it ever was
or ever will be because it implies *no change at all*. It is not a
continuum nor is it understood by being compared to an opposite.
Knowledge never involves comparisons. That is its essential difference
from everything else the mind can grasp. "A little knowledge" is not
dangerous except to the ego. Vaguely it senses threat and being unable
to realize that "a little knowledge" is a meaningless phrase since "all"
and "a little" in this context are the same, the ego decides that, since
"all" is impossible, the fear does not lie there. "A little," however,
is a scarcity concept, and *this* the ego understands well. "A little,"
then, is perceived as the real threat.

^83^ The essential thing to remember is that the ego *does not
recognize* the real source of its perceived threat, and if *you*
associate yourself with the ego, *you* do not perceive the whole
situation as it is. Only your allegiance to it gives the ego *any* power
over you.

^84^ We have spoken of the ego as if it were a separate thing acting on
its own. This was necessary to persuade you that you cannot dismiss it
lightly and must realize how much of your thinking is ego-directed. We
cannot safely let it go at that, however, or you will regard yourselves
as necessarily conflicted as long as you are here, or more properly, as
long as you *believe* that you are here.

^85^ The ego is nothing more than a *part* of your belief about
yourselves. Your other life has continued without interruption and has
been and always will be totally unaffected by your attempts to
disassociate. The ratio of repression and dissociation varies with the
individual ego-illusion, but dissociation is always involved or you
would not believe that you *are* here. In learning to escape from the
illusions you have made, your great debt to each other is something you
must never forget. It is exactly the same debt that you owe to me.
Whenever you react egotistically towards each other, you are throwing
away the graciousness of your indebtedness and the holy perception it
would produce.

^86^ The term "holy" can be used here because as you learn how much you
*are* indebted to the whole Sonship, which *includes* me, you come as
close to knowledge as perception ever can. The gap is then so small that
knowledge can easily flow across it and obliterate it forever. You have
very little trust in me as yet, but it will increase as you turn more
and more often to me *instead* of your egos for guidance. The results
will convince you increasingly that your choice in turning to me is the
only sane one you can make. No one who has learned from experience that
one choice brings peace and joy while another brings chaos and disaster
needs much conditioning.

^87^ The ego cannot withstand the conditioning process because the
process itself *demonstrates* that there is another way. Conditioning by
rewards has always been more effective than conditioning by pain because
pain is an ego-illusion and can never induce more than a temporary
effect. The rewards of God, however, are immediately recognized as
eternal. Since this recognition is made by you and *not* the ego, the
recognition *itself* establishes that you and your ego *cannot* be
identical. You may believe that you have already accepted the
difference, but you are by no means convinced as yet. The very fact that
you are preoccupied with the idea of escaping *from* the ego shows this.

^88^ You *cannot* escape from the ego by humbling it or controlling it
or punishing it. Remember that the ego and the Soul *do not know* each
other. The separated mind cannot maintain the separation *except* by
dissociating. Having done this, it utilizes repression against all truly
natural impulses, not because the *ego* is a separate thing, but because
you want to believe that *you* are. The ego is a device for maintaining
this belief, but it is still only *your* willingness to use the device
that enables it to endure.

^89^ My trust in you is greater than yours in me at the moment, but it
will not always be that way. Your mission is very simple. You have been
chosen to live so as to demonstrate that you are *not* an ego. I repeat
that I do not choose God's channels wrongly. The Holy One shares my
trust and always approves my Atonement decisions because my will is
never out of accord with His. I have told you before that I am in charge
of the whole Atonement. This is *only* because I completed my part in it
as a man and can now complete it through other men. My chosen receiving
and sending channels cannot fail because I will lend them *my* strength
as long as theirs is wanting.

^90^ I will go with you to the Holy One, and through *my* perception, He
can bridge the little gap. Your gratitude to *each other* is the only
gift I want. I will bring it to God for you, knowing that to know your
brother *is* to know God. A little knowledge is an all-encompassing
thing. If you are grateful to each other, you are grateful to God for
what He created. Through your gratitude, you can come to know each
other, and one moment of real recognition makes all men your brothers
because they are all of your Father. Love does not conquer all things,
but it *does* set all things right. Because you are all the Kingdom of
God, I can lead you back to your own creations, which you do not yet
know. What has been dissociated is still there.

^91^ As you come closer to a brother, you *do* approach me and, as you
withdraw from him, *I* become distant to you. Your giant step forward
was to insist on a "collaborative venture." This does not go against the
true spirit of meditation; it is inherent in it. Meditation is a
collaborative venture with God. It *cannot* be undertaken successfully
by those who disengage themselves from the Sonship because they are
disengaging themselves from me. God will come to you *only* as you will
give Him to your brothers. Learn first of them, and you will be ready to
hear God as you hear them. That is because the function of love is one.

^92^ How can you teach someone the value of something he has
deliberately thrown away? He must have thrown it away because he did not
value it. You can only show him how miserable he is without it and bring
it near very slowly, so he can learn how his misery lessens as he
approaches it. This conditions him to associate his misery with its
absence and to associate the opposite of misery with its presence. It
gradually becomes desirable as he changes his mind about its worth.

^93^ I am conditioning you to associate misery with the ego and joy with
the Soul. You have conditioned yourselves the other way around. A far
greater reward, however, will break through any conditioning if it is
repeatedly offered whenever the old habit pattern is broken. You are
still free to choose, but can you really *want* the rewards of the ego
in the presence of the rewards of God?
:::

[]{#part0009_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. Creation and Communication**](#part0004.html#level-25) {#part0009_split_007.html#h1-25 .level1a}

^94^ It should be clear by now that, while the content of any particular
ego-illusion does not matter, it is usually more helpful to correct it
in a specific context. Ego-illusions are *quite* specific, although they
frequently change and although the mind is naturally abstract. The mind
nevertheless becomes concrete voluntarily as soon as it splits. However,
only *part* of it splits, so only *part* of it is concrete. The concrete
part is the same part that believes in the ego because the ego *depends*
on the specific. It is the part that believes your existence means you
are *separate*.

^95^ Everything the ego perceives is a separate whole, without the
relationships that imply *being*. The ego is thus *against*
communication except in so far as it is utilized to *establish*
separateness rather than to abolish it. The communication system of the
ego is based on its own thought system, as is everything else it
dictates. Its communication is controlled by its need to protect itself,
and it will disrupt communication when it experiences threat. While this
is always so, individual egos perceive different kinds of threat which
are quite specific in their own judgment. For example, although all
forms of perceived demands may be classified or judged by the ego as
coercive communication which must be disrupted, the response of breaking
communication will nevertheless be to a *specific* person or persons.

^96^ The specificity of the ego's thinking, then, results in a spurious
kind of generalization which is really not abstract at all. It will
respond in certain specific ways to *all* stimuli which it perceives as
related. In contrast the Soul reacts in the same way to everything it
knows is true and does not respond at all to anything else. Nor does it
make any attempt to *establish* what is true. It knows that what is true
is everything that God created. It is in complete and direct
communication with every aspect of creation because it is in complete
and direct communication with its Creator.

^97^ *This* communication *is* the Will of God. Creation and
communication are synonymous. God created every mind by communicating
His Mind to it, thus establishing it forever as a channel for the
reception of His Mind and Will. Since only beings of a like order can
truly communicate, His creations naturally communicate *with* Him and
*like* Him. This communication is perfectly abstract in that its quality
is universal in application and not subject to *any* judgment, *any*
exception, or *any* alteration. God created you *by* this and *for*
this. The mind can distort its function, but it cannot endow itself with
functions it was not given. That is why the mind cannot totally lose the
ability to communicate, even though it may refuse to utilize it on
behalf of being.

^98^ Existence as well as being rests on communication. Existence,
however, is *specific* in how, what, and with whom communication is
judged to be worth undertaking. Being is completely without these
distinctions. It is a state in which the mind *is* in communication with
everything that is real, including the Soul. To whatever extent you
permit this state to be curtailed, you are limiting your sense of your
*own* reality, which becomes total only by your recognizing *all*
reality in the glorious context of its *real* relationship to you. This
*is* your reality. Do not desecrate it or recoil from it. It is your
real home, your real temple, and your real Self.

^99^ God, who encompasses *all* being, nevertheless created beings who
have everything individually but who want to share it to increase their
joy. Nothing that is real can be increased *except* by sharing. That is
why God Himself created you. Divine Abstraction takes joy in
application, and that is what creation *means*. "How," "what," and "to
whom" are irrelevant because real creation gives everything since it can
create *only* like itself. Remember that in being there is no difference
between *having* and *being* as there is in existence. In the state of
being, the mind gives everything always.

^100^The Bible repeatedly states that you should praise God. This hardly
means that you should tell Him how wonderful He is. He has no ego with
which to accept such thanks and no perception with which to judge such
offerings. But unless you take your part in the creation, His joy is not
complete because *yours* is incomplete. And *this* He does know. He
knows it in His own Being and its experience of His Son's experience.
The constant *going out* of His love is blocked when His channels are
closed, and He *is* lonely when the minds He created do not communicate
fully with Him.

^101^ God *has* kept your kingdom for you, but He cannot share His joy
with you until you know it with your whole mind. Even revelation is not
enough because it is communication *from* God. It is not enough until it
is *shared*. God does not need revelation returned to Him, which would
clearly be impossible, but He *does* want revelation brought to others.
This cannot be done with the actual revelation because its content
cannot be expressed, and it is intensely personal to the mind which
receives it. It can, however, still be returned *by* that mind through
its attitudes to *other* minds which the knowledge from the revelation
brings.

^102^ God is praised whenever any mind learns to be wholly helpful. This
is impossible without being wholly harmless because the two beliefs
coexist. The truly helpful are invulnerable because they are *not*
protecting their egos, so that nothing *can* hurt them. Their
helpfulness *is* their praise of God, and He will return their praise of
Him because they are like Him, and they can rejoice together. God goes
out to them and through them, and there is great joy throughout the
Kingdom. Every mind that is changed adds to this joy with its own
individual willingness to share in it. The truly helpful are God's
miracle workers whom I direct until we are all united in the joy of the
Kingdom. I will direct you to wherever you can be truly helpful and to
whoever can follow my guidance through you.
:::

[]{#part0009_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. True Rehabilitation**](#part0004.html#level-26) {#part0009_split_008.html#h1-26 .level1a}

^103^ Every mind which is split needs rehabilitation. The medical
orientation to rehabilitation emphasizes the body, while the vocational
orientation stresses the ego. The "team" approach generally leads more
to confusion than to anything else because it is too often misused as a
way of exerting the ego's domination over other egos, rather than as a
real experiment in the cooperation of minds. Rehabilitation as a
movement is an improvement over the overt neglect of those in need of
help, but it is often little more than a painful attempt on the part of
the halt to lead the blind.

^104^ The ego is likely to fear broken bodies because it cannot tolerate
them. The ego cannot tolerate ego weakness either without ambivalence
because it is afraid of its own weakness as well as the weakness of its
chosen home. When it is threatened, the ego blocks your natural impulse
to help, placing you under the strain of divided will. You may then be
tempted to withdraw to allow your ego to recover and to gain enough
strength to be helpful again on a basis limited enough *not* to threaten
your ego but too limited to give *you* joy. Those with broken bodies are
often looked down on by the ego because of its belief that nothing but a
perfect body is worthy as its *own* temple.

^105^ A mind that recoils from a hurt body is in great need of
rehabilitation itself. *All* symptoms of hurt need true helpfulness, and
whenever they are met with this, the mind that so meets them heals
*itself.* Rehabilitation is an attitude of praising God as He Himself
knows praise. He offers praise to you, and you must offer it to others.
The chief handicaps of the clinicians lie in their attitudes to those
whom their egos perceive as weakened and damaged. *By* these
evaluations, they have weakened and damaged their own helpfulness and
have thus set their own rehabilitation back. Rehabilitation is *not*
concerned either with the ego's fight for control or its need to avoid
and withdraw. You can do much on behalf of your own rehabilitation *and*
that of others if in a situation calling for healing you think of it
this way:

^106^ I am here only to be truly helpful.\
I am here to represent Christ, Who sent me.\
I do not have to worry about what to say or what to do,\
because He Who sent me will direct me.\
I am content to be wherever He wishes,\
knowing He goes there with me.\
I will be healed as I let Him teach me to heal.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Five**](#part0004.html#chap-5) {#part0010_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Healing and Wholeness**](#part0004.html#chap-5) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-27) {#part0010_split_000.html#h1-27 .level1a1}

^5:1^ To heal is to make happy. I have told you before to think how many
opportunities you have to gladden yourselves and how many you have
refused. This is exactly the same as telling you that you have refused
to heal yourselves. The light that belongs to you is the light of joy.
Radiance is not associated with sorrow. Depression is often contagious
but, although it may affect those who come in contact with it, they do
not yield to the influence whole-heartedly. But joy calls forth an
integrated willingness to share in it and thus promotes the mind's
natural impulse *to respond as one.*

^2^ Those who attempt to heal without being wholly joyous themselves
call forth different kinds of responses at the same time and thus
deprive others of the joy of responding whole-heartedly. To be
whole-hearted, you *must* be happy. If fear and love cannot coexist and
if it is impossible to be wholly fearful and remain alive, then the only
possible whole state *is* that of love. There is no difference between
love and joy. Therefore, the only possible whole state is the wholly
joyous. To heal or to make joyous is therefore the same as to integrate
and to *make one*. That is why it makes no difference to what part or by
what part of the Sonship the healing is done. *Every* part benefits and
benefits equally.

^3^ *You* are being blessed by every beneficent thought of any of your
brothers anywhere. You should want to bless them in return out of
gratitude. You do not have to know them individually or they you. The
light is so strong that it radiates throughout the Sonship and returns
thanks to the Father for radiating His joy upon it. Only God's holy
Children are worthy to be channels of His beautiful joy because only
they are beautiful enough to hold it by sharing it. It is impossible for
a Child of God to love his neighbor *except* as himself. That is why the
healer's prayer is:

^4^ Let me know this brother as I know myself.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Healing As Joining**](#part0004.html#level-28) {#part0010_split_001.html#h1-28 .level1a}

^5^ Healing is an act of thought by which two minds perceive their
oneness and become glad. This gladness calls to every part of the
Sonship to rejoice with them and lets God Himself go out into them and
through them. Only the healed mind can experience revelation with
lasting effect because revelation is an experience of pure joy. If you
do not choose to be wholly joyous, your mind cannot *have* what it does
not choose to *be*. Remember that the Soul knows no difference between
"being" and "having." The higher mind thinks according to the laws which
the Soul obeys and therefore honors only the laws of God. To Him,
getting is meaningless and giving is all. Having everything, the Soul
*holds* everything *by* giving it and thus creates as the Father
created.

^6^ If you think about it, you will see that, while this kind of
thinking is totally alien to having *things*, even to the lower mind it
is quite comprehensible in connection with *ideas*. If you share a
physical possession, you *do* divide its ownership. If you share an
idea, however, you do *not* lessen it. *All* of it is still yours,
although all of it has been given away. Further, if the person to whom
you give it accepts it as *his*, he reinforces it in *your* mind, and
thus *increases* it. If you can accept the concept that the world *is*
one of ideas, the whole belief in the false association which the ego
makes between giving and *losing* is gone.

^7^ Let us start our process of reawakening with just a few simple
concepts:

^8^ Thoughts increase by being given away.\
The more who believe in them, the stronger they become.\
Everything is an idea.\
How, then, is it possible that giving and losing can be\
meaningfully associated?

^9^ This is the invitation to the Holy Spirit. I told you that I could
reach up and bring the Holy Spirit down to you, but I can bring Him to
you *only* at your own invitation. The Holy Spirit is nothing more than
your own right mind. He was also mine. The Bible says, "May the mind be
in you that was also in Christ Jesus," and uses this as a *blessing*. It
is the blessing of miracle-mindedness. It asks that you may think as I
thought, joining with me in Christ-thinking.

^10^ The Holy Spirit is the only part of the Holy Trinity which is
symbolic. He is referred to in the Bible as the Healer, the Comforter,
and the Guide. He is also described as something "separate," apart from
the Father and from the Son. I myself said, "If I go I will send you
another comforter, and He will abide with you." The Holy Spirit is a
difficult concept to grasp precisely because it *is* symbolic and
therefore open to many different interpretations. As a man and as one of
God's creations, my right thinking, which came from the Universal
Inspiration which *is* the Holy Spirit, taught me first and foremost
that this Inspiration is for all. I could not have It myself *without*
knowing this.

^11^ The word "know" is proper in this context because the Holy
Inspiration is so close to knowledge that it calls it forth; or better,
allows it to come. We have spoken before of the higher or the "true"
perception, which is so close to truth that God Himself can flow across
the little gap. Knowledge is always ready to flow everywhere, but it
cannot oppose. Therefore, you can obstruct it, although you can never
lose it. The Holy Spirit is the Christ Mind, which senses the knowledge
that lies beyond perception. It came into being with the separation as a
protection, inspiring the beginning of the Atonement at the same time.
Before that, there was no need for healing and no one was comfortless.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Mind of the Atonement**](#part0004.html#level-29) {#part0010_split_002.html#h1-29 .level1a}

^12^ God honored even the miscreations of His Children because they had
made them, but He also blessed them with a way of thinking that could
raise their perceptions until they became so lofty that they could reach
almost back to Him. The Holy Spirit is the Mind of the Atonement. It
represents a state of mind that comes close enough to one-mindedness
that transfer to it is at last possible. Transfer depends on common
elements in the old learning and the new situation to which it is
transferred. Perception is not knowledge, but it can be transferred *to*
knowledge or *cross over* into it. It might even be more helpful here to
use the literal meaning of "carried" over since the last step is taken
by God.

^13^ The Holy Spirit, the shared Inspiration of all the Sonship, induces
a kind of perception in which many elements are like those in the
Kingdom of Heaven itself.

^14^ First, its universality is perfectly clear, and no one who receives
it could ever believe for one instant that sharing it involves anything
*but* gain.

^15^ Second, it is incapable of attack and is therefore truly open. This
means that, although it does not engender knowledge, it does not
*obstruct* it in any way.

^15a^ \[Third, it is an unequivocal call to love. Every other voice is
still.\]

^15b^ There is a point at which sufficient quantitative changes produce
real qualitative differences. The next point requires real understanding
because it is the point at which the shift occurs:

^16^ Finally, it points the way *beyond* the healing which it brings and
leads the mind beyond its own integration into the paths of creation.

^17^ Healing is not creating; it is reparation. The Holy Spirit promotes
healing by looking *beyond* it to what the Children of God were before
healing was needed and will be when they have *been* healed. This
alteration of the time sequence should be quite familiar because it is
very similar to the shift in time perception which the miracle
introduces. The Holy Spirit is the *motivation* for miracle-mindedness,
the will to *heal* the separation by letting it go. This will is *in*
you because God placed it in your mind, and although you can keep it
asleep, you cannot obliterate it.

^18^ God Himself keeps this will alive by transmitting it from His Mind
to yours as long as there is time. It is partly His and partly yours.
The miracle itself is just this fusion or union of will between Father
and Son. The Holy Spirit is the spirit of joy. He is the Call to return
with which God blessed the minds of His separated Sons. This is the
vocation of the mind. The mind had no calling until the separation
because before that it had only *being* and would not have understood
the call to right thinking. The Holy Spirit was God's Answer to the
separation, the means by which the Atonement could repair until the
whole mind returned to creating.

^19^ The Atonement and the separation began at the same time. When man
made the ego, God placed in him the call to joy. This call is so strong
that the ego always dissolves at its sound. That is why you can choose
to listen to two voices within you. One you made yourself and that one
is not of God. But the other is given you *by* God Who asks you only to
listen to it. The Holy Spirit is in you in a very literal sense. His is
the Voice that calls you back to where you were before and will be
again.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Voice of God**](#part0004.html#level-30) {#part0010_split_003.html#h1-30 .level1a}

^20^ It is possible even in this world to hear *only* that Voice and no
other. It takes effort and great willingness to learn. It is the final
lesson that I learned, and God's Sons are as equal as learners as they
are as Souls. The Voice of the Holy Spirit *is* the call to Atonement or
the restoration of the integrity of the mind. When the Atonement is
complete and the whole Sonship is healed, there will be no call to
return, but what God creates is eternal. The Holy Spirit will remain
with the Sons of God to bless *their* creations and keep them in the
light of joy.

^21^ You *are* the Kingdom of Heaven, but you have let the belief in
darkness enter your minds, and so you need a new light. The Holy Spirit
is the radiance that you must let banish the idea of darkness. His is
the glory before which dissociation falls away and the Kingdom of Heaven
breaks through into its own. Before the separation you did not need
guidance. You *knew* as you will know again, but as you do *not* know
now. God does not guide because He can share only perfect knowledge.
Guidance is evaluative because it implies that there is a *right* way
and also a *wrong* way, one to be chosen and the other to be avoided. By
choosing one, you give up the other.

^22^ This *is* a conflict state. It *means* that knowledge has been lost
because knowledge is sure. God is not in you in a literal sense; *you*
are part of *Him*. When you chose to leave Him, He gave you a Voice to
speak *for* Him because He could no longer share His knowledge with you
without hindrance. Direct communication was broken because you had made
another voice through another will. The Holy Spirit calls you both to
remember and to forget. You have chosen to be in a state of opposition
in which opposites are possible. As a result, there *are* choices which
you must make. In the holy state, the will is free in the sense that its
*creative* power is unlimited, but choice itself is meaningless.

^23^ Freedom to choose is the same *power* as freedom to create, but its
*application* is different. Choosing *means* divided will. The Holy
Spirit is one way of choosing. This way is in you because there is also
*another* way. God did not leave His Children comfortless, even though
they chose to leave Him. The voice they put in their minds was *not* the
voice of His Will for which the Holy Spirit speaks. The call to return
is stronger than the call to depart, but it speaks in a different way.

^24^ The Voice of the Holy Spirit does not command because it is
incapable of arrogance. It does not demand because it does not seek
control. It does not overcome because it does not attack. It merely
*reminds*. It is compelling only because of what it reminds you *of.* It
brings to your mind the *other* way, remaining quiet even in the midst
of the turmoil you have made for yourselves. The Voice for God is always
quiet because it speaks of peace. Yet peace is stronger than war because
it heals. War is division, not increase. No one gains from strife.

^25^ "What profiteth it a man if he gain the whole world and lose his
own Soul?" That means that if he listens to the wrong voice, he has
*lost sight* of his Soul. He *cannot* lose it, but he *can* not know it.
It is therefore *lost to him* until he chooses right. The Holy Spirit is
your Guide in choosing. He is the part of your mind which *always*
speaks for the right choice because He speaks for God. He is your
remaining communication with God, which you can interrupt but cannot
destroy.

^26^ The Holy Spirit is the way in which God's Will can be done on earth
as it is in Heaven. Both Heaven and earth are in *you* because the call
of both is in your will and therefore in your mind. The Voice for God
comes from your own altars to Him. These altars are not things; they are
*devotions.* Yet you have other devotions now. Your divided devotion has
given you the two voices, and you must choose at which altar you will to
serve. The call you answer now is an evaluation because it is a
*decision*. The decision itself is very simple. It is made on the basis
of which call is worth more to you.

^27^ My mind will always be like yours because we were created as
equals. It was only my *decision* that gave me all power in Heaven and
earth. My only gift to you is to help you make the same decision *for
yourself*. The will for this decision is the will to *share* it because
the decision itself *is* the decision to share. It is *made by giving*
and is therefore the *one* act of mind that resembles true creation. You
understand the role of "models" in the learning process and the
importance of the models you value and choose to follow in determining
what you will to learn. I am your model for decision. By deciding for
God, I showed you that this decision *can* be made and that *you* can
make it.

^28^ I promised you that the mind that made the decision for me is also
in *you* and that you can let it change you just as it changed me. This
mind is unequivocal because it hears only *one* voice and answers in
only *one* way. You are the light of the world with me. Rest does not
come from sleeping but from waking. The Holy Spirit is the call to awake
and be glad. The world is very tired because it *is* the idea of
weariness. Our task is the joyous one of waking it to the Call for God.
Everyone will answer the Call of the Holy Spirit, or the Sonship cannot
be as one. What better vocation could there be for any part of the
Kingdom than to restore it to the perfect integration that can make it
whole?

^29^ Hear only this through the Holy Spirit within you, and teach your
brothers to listen as I am teaching you. When you are tempted by the
wrong voice, call on me to remind you how to heal by sharing my decision
*and making it stronger*. As we share this goal we increase its power to
attract the whole Sonship and to bring it back into the Oneness in which
it was created. Remember that "yoke" means "join together" and "burden"
means "message." Let us reconsider the Biblical statement, "My yoke is
easy and my burden light" in this way: "Let us join together, for my
message is light."

^30^ I came into your minds because you had grown vaguely aware of the
fact that there *is* another way or another Voice. Having given this
invitation to the Holy Spirit, I could come to provide the model for
*how to think*. Psychology has become the study of *behavior,* but no
one denies the basic law that behavior is a response to *motivation*,
and motivation is will. I have enjoined you to behave as I behaved, but
we must respond to the same mind to do this. This mind is the Holy
Spirit, whose will is for God always. He teaches you how to keep me as
the model for your thought and to behave like me as a result.

^31^ The power of our joint motivation is beyond belief but *not* beyond
accomplishment. What we can accomplish together *has* no limits because
the Call for God *is* the call to the unlimited. Child of God, my
message is for *you* to hear and give away as you answer the Holy Spirit
within you.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Guide to Salvation**](#part0004.html#level-31) {#part0010_split_004.html#h1-31 .level1a}

^32^ The way to learn to know your brother is by perceiving the Holy
Spirit in him. We have already said that the Holy Spirit is the bridge
or thought-transfer of perception to knowledge, so we can use the terms
as if they were related because in His mind they *are*. The relationship
*must* be in His mind because, unless it were, the separation between
the two ways of thinking would not be open to healing. He is part of the
Holy Trinity because His mind is partly yours and also partly God's.
This needs clarification, not in statement, since we have said it
before, but in *experience*.

^33^ The Holy Spirit is the *idea* of healing. Being thought, the idea
*gains as it is shared*. Being the Call *for* God, it is also the idea
*of* God. Since *you* are part of God, it is also the idea of *yourself*
as well as of all the parts of God. The idea of the Holy Spirit shares
the property of other ideas because it follows the laws of the Universe
of which it is a part. Therefore, it is strengthened by being given
away. It increases in *you* as you give it to your brothers. Since
thoughts do not have to be conscious to exist, your brother does not
have to be aware of the Holy Spirit either in himself or in you for this
miracle to occur.

^34^ Your brother may have dissociated the Call for God, just as *you*
have. The dissociation is healed in *both* of you as *you* become aware
of the Call for God in him and thus acknowledge its *being*. There are
two ways of seeing your brother which are diametrically opposed to each
other. They must both be in *your* mind because *you* are the perceiver.
They must also be in *his* because you are perceiving *him*. See him
through the Holy Spirit in *his* mind, and you will recognize Him in
*yours*. What you acknowledge in your brother you *are* acknowledging in
yourself, and what you share you strengthen.

^35^ The Voice of the Holy Spirit *is* weak in you. That is why you
*must* share it. It must be *increased* in strength before *you* can
hear it. It is impossible to hear it in yourself while it is so weak in
your *own* mind. It is not weak in itself, but it *is* limited by your
unwillingness to hear it. Will itself is an idea and is therefore
strengthened by being shared. If you make the mistake of looking for the
Holy Spirit in yourself alone, your meditations will frighten you
because by *adopting* the ego's viewpoint you are undertaking an
ego-alien journey with the ego as *guide*. This is *bound* to produce
fear.

^36^ Delay is of the ego because time is *its* concept. Delay is
obviously a time idea. Both time and delay are meaningless in eternity.
We have said before that the Holy Spirit is God's *Answer* to the ego.
Everything of which the Holy Spirit reminds you is in direct opposition
to the ego's notions because true and false perceptions are *themselves*
opposed. The Holy Spirit has the task of *undoing* what the ego has
made. He undoes it in the same realm of discourse in which the ego
itself operates, or the mind would be unable to understand the change.

^37^ We have repeatedly emphasized that one level of the mind is not
understandable to another. So it is with the ego and the Soul, with time
and eternity. Eternity is an idea of God, so the Soul understands it
perfectly. Time is a belief of the ego, so the lower mind, which *is*
the ego's domain, accepts it without question. The only aspect of time
which is really eternal is *now*. That is what we really mean when we
say that "now is the only time." The literal nature of this statement
does not mean anything to the ego, which interprets it at best to mean
"don't worry about the future." That is not what it really means at all.

^38^ The Holy Spirit is the Mediator between the interpretations of the
ego and the knowledge of the Soul. His ability to deal with symbols
enables Him to work *against* the ego's beliefs in its own language. His
equal ability to look *beyond* symbols into eternity also enables Him to
understand the laws of God, for which He speaks. He can thus perform the
function of *reinterpreting* what the ego makes, *not* by destruction
but by *understanding*. Understanding is light, and light leads to
knowledge. The Holy Spirit is *in* light because He is in you who *are*
light, but you yourselves do not know this. It is therefore the task of
the Holy Spirit to reinterpret *you* on behalf of God.

^39^ You cannot understand yourselves alone. This is because you have no
meaning *apart* from your rightful place in the Sonship and the rightful
place of the Sonship in God. This is your life, your eternity, and
*yourself*. It is of this that the Holy Spirit reminds you. It is this
that the Holy Spirit *sees*. This vision invariably frightens the ego
because it is so calm. Peace is the ego's greatest enemy because,
according to *its* interpretation of reality, war is the guarantee of
its survival. The ego becomes strong in strife. If you believe there
*is* strife, you will react viciously because the idea of danger has
entered your mind. The idea itself *is* an appeal to the ego.

^40^ The Holy Spirit is as vigilant as the ego to the call of danger,
opposing it with His strength, just as the ego *welcomes* it with all
its might. The Holy Spirit counters this welcome by welcoming peace.
Peace and eternity are as closely related as are time and war.
Perception as well as knowledge derives meaning from relationships.
Those which you accept are the foundations of your beliefs. The
separation is merely another term for a split mind. It was not an act,
but a *thought*. Therefore, the idea of separation can be given away,
just as the idea of unity can. Either way, the idea will be strengthened
*in the mind of the giver*.

^41^ The ego is the symbol of separation, just as the Holy Spirit is the
symbol of peace. What you perceive in others, you are strengthening in
*yourself.* You let your mind misperceive, but the Holy Spirit lets your
mind reinterpret its own misperceptions. The Holy Spirit is the perfect
teacher. He uses only what your minds *already* understand to teach you
that you do *not* understand it. The Holy Spirit can deal with an
unwilling learner without going counter to his will because part of his
will *is* still for God. Despite the ego's attempts to conceal this
part, it is still much stronger than the ego, even though the ego does
not recognize it. The Holy Spirit recognizes it perfectly because it is
His own dwelling place or the place in the mind where He is at home.

^42^ *You* are at home there, too, because it is a place of peace, and
peace is of God. You who are part of God are not at home *except* in His
peace. If peace is eternal, you are at home only in eternity. The ego
made the world as *it* perceives it, but the Holy Spirit, the
*reinterpreter* of what the ego made, sees it only as a teaching device
for bringing you home. The Holy Spirit must perceive time and
reinterpret it into the timeless. The mind must be led into eternity
*through* time because, having made time, it is capable of perceiving
its opposite.

^43^ The Holy Spirit must work through opposites because He must work
with and for a mind that *is* in opposition. Correct and learn and be
open to learning. You have *not* made truth, but truth can still set you
free. Look as the Holy Spirit looks, and understand as He understands.
His understanding looks back to God in remembrance of me. He is in Holy
Communion always, and He is part of *you*. He is your Guide to salvation
because He holds the remembrance of things past and to come. He holds
this gladness gently in your minds, asking only that you *increase* it
in His name by sharing it, to increase His joy in *you*.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Therapy and Teaching**](#part0004.html#level-32) {#part0010_split_005.html#h1-32 .level1a}

^44^ You must have noticed how often I have used your own ideas to help
you. You have learned to be a loving, wise, and very understanding
therapist *except for yourself*. That exception has given you more than
perception for others because of what you saw in *them* but less than
knowledge of your real relationships *to* them because you did not
accept them as *part* of you. Understanding *is* beyond perception
because it introduces meaning. It is, however, below knowledge even
though it can grow *towards* it. It is possible, with great effort, to
understand someone else to some extent and to be quite helpful to him,
but the effort is misdirected. The misdirection is quite apparent; it is
directed away from *you*.

^45^ This does not mean that it is *lost* to you, but it *does* mean
that you are not aware of it. I have saved all your kindnesses and every
loving thought you have had. I have purified them of the errors which
hid their light and have kept them for you in their own perfect
radiance. They are beyond destruction and beyond guilt. They came from
the Holy Spirit within *you*, and we know what God creates is eternal.
What fear has hidden still is part of you.

^46^ Joining the Atonement, which I have repeatedly asked you to do, is
always a way *out* of fear. This does not mean that you can safely fail
to acknowledge anything that is true. However, the Holy Spirit will not
fail to help you reinterpret everything that you perceive as fearful and
teach you that *only* what is loving *is* true. Truth is beyond your
ability to destroy but entirely within your grasp. It belongs to you
because you created it. It is yours because it is a part of you, just as
you are part of God because He created *you*.

^47^ The Atonement is the *guarantee* of the safety of the Kingdom.
Nothing good is lost because it comes from the Holy Spirit, the Voice
for creation. Nothing that is *not* good was ever created and therefore
*cannot* be protected. What the ego makes, it *keeps to itself,* and so
it is without strength. Its unshared existence does not die; it was
merely never born. Real birth is not a beginning; it is a *continuing.*
Everything that can continue has *been* born, but it can *increase* as
you are willing to return the part of your mind that needs healing to
the higher part and thus render your creating undivided.

^48^ As a therapist, you yourself tell your patients that the real
difference between neurotic and "healthy" guilt feelings is that
neurotic guilt feelings *do not help anyone*. This distinction is wise
though incomplete. Let us make the distinction a little sharper now.
Neurotic guilt feelings are a device of the ego for "atoning" without
sharing and for asking pardon without change. The ego *never* calls for
*real* Atonement and cannot tolerate forgiveness, which *is* change.

^49^ Your concept of "healthy guilt feelings" has merit, but without the
concept of the Atonement, it lacks the healing potential it holds. You
made the distinction in terms of feelings, which led to a decision not
to *repeat* the error, which is only *part* of healing. Your concept
lacked the idea of *undoing* it. What you were really advocating, then,
was adopting a policy of sharing without a real *foundation*. I have
come to *give* you the foundation, so your own thoughts can make you
*really* free. You have carried the burden of the ideas you did not
share and which were therefore too weak to increase, but you did not
recognize how to undo their existence *because* you had made them.

^50^ You *cannot* cancel out your past errors alone. They will *not*
disappear from your mind without remedy. The remedy is *not* of your
making, any more than *you* are. The Atonement cannot be understood
except as a *pure act of sharing*. That is what is meant when we said it
is possible even in this world to listen to *one* voice. If you are part
of God and the Sonship is one, you *cannot* be limited to the "self" the
ego sees. Every loving thought held in *any* part of the Sonship belongs
to every part. It is shared *because* it is loving. Sharing is God's way
of creating and also *yours*. Your ego can keep you in exile *from* the
Kingdom, but in the Kingdom itself it has no power.

^51^ You have become willing to receive my messages as I give them
without interference by the ego, so we can clarify an earlier point. We
said that you will one day teach as much as you learn and that will keep
you in balance. The time is now because you have *let* it be now. You
cannot learn *except* by teaching.

^52^ I heard one voice because I had learned that learning is attained
*by* teaching. I understood that *I could not atone for myself alone.*
Listening to one voice means the will to *share* the voice in order to
hear it yourself. The mind that was in me is still irresistibly drawn to
every mind created by God because God's Wholeness *is* the wholeness of
His Son.

^53^ Turning the other cheek does *not* mean that you should submit to
violence without protest. It means that you cannot *be* hurt and do not
want to show your brother anything *except* your wholeness. Show him
that he *cannot* hurt you and hold nothing against him, or you hold it
against yourself. Teaching is done in many ways: by formal means, by
guidance, and above all *by example*. Teaching is therapy because it
means the *sharing* of ideas and the awareness that to share them is to
*strengthen* them. The union of the Sonship *is* its protection. The ego
cannot prevail against the Kingdom *because* it is united, and the ego
fades away and is undone in the presence of the attraction of the parts
of the Sonship, which hear the call of the Holy Spirit to be as One.

^54^ I cannot forget my need to teach what I have learned, which arose
in me *because* I learned it. I call upon you to teach what you have
learned because by so doing *you* can depend on it. Make it dependable
in my name because my name is the Name of God's Son. What I learned I
give you freely, and the mind which was in me rejoices as *you* choose
to hear it. The Holy Spirit atones in all of us by *undoing* and thus
lifts the burden you have placed in your mind. By following Him, He
leads you back to God where you belong, and how can you find this way
except by taking your brother with you?

^55^ My part in the Atonement is not complete until *you* join it and
give it away. As you teach, so shall you learn. I will never leave you
or forsake you because to forsake you would be to forsake myself and God
who created me. You will forsake yourselves and God if you forsake *any*
of your brothers. You are more than your brother's keeper. In fact, you
do not *want* to keep him. You must learn to see him as he is and *know*
that he belongs to God as you do. How could you treat your brother
better than by rendering unto God the things which are God's?

^56^ Ideas do not *leave* the mind which thought them to have a separate
being, nor do separate thoughts conflict with one another in space
because they do not occupy space at all. However, human ideas *can*
conflict in content because they occur at different levels and include
opposite thoughts at the *same* level. *It is impossible to share
opposing thoughts*. The Holy Spirit does not *let* you forsake your
brothers. Therefore, you can really share *only* the parts of your
thoughts which are of Him and which He also keeps for *you*. And of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven. All the rest remains with you until He has
reinterpreted them in the light of the Kingdom, making them, too, worthy
of being shared. When they have been sufficiently purified, He lets you
give them away. The will to share them *is* their purification.

^57^ The Atonement gives you the power of a healed mind, but the power
to create is of God. Therefore, those who have been forgiven must devote
themselves first to healing because having *received* the idea of
healing, they must *give* it to *hold* it. The full power of creation
cannot be expressed as long as *any* of God's ideas withhold it from the
Kingdom. The joint will of *all* the Sonship is the only creator that
can create like the Father because only the complete can think
completely, and the thinking of God lacks nothing. Everything you think
that is not through the Holy Spirit *is* lacking.

^58^ How can you who are so holy suffer? All your past except its beauty
is gone, and nothing is left except a blessing. You can indeed depart in
peace because I have loved you as I loved myself. You go *with* my
blessing and *for* my blessing. Hold it and share it, that it may always
be ours. I place the peace of God in your heart and in your hands, to
hold and share. The heart is pure to hold it and the hands are strong to
give it. We cannot lose. My judgment is as strong as the wisdom of God,
in Whose Heart and Hands we have our being. His quiet Children are His
blessed Sons. The Thoughts of God are with you.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Two Decisions**](#part0004.html#level-33) {#part0010_split_006.html#h1-33 .level1a}

^59^ Perhaps some of our concepts will become clearer and more
personally meaningful if the ego's use of guilt is clarified. The ego
has a purpose, just as the Holy Spirit has. The ego's purpose is *fear*
because *only* the fearful can *be* egotistic. The ego's logic is as
impeccable as that of the Holy Spirit because your mind has all the
means at its disposal to side with Heaven or earth, as it elects. But
again, let us remember that both are in *you*. In Heaven there is no
guilt because the Kingdom is attained through the Atonement, which
releases you to create. The word "create" is appropriate here because,
once what *you* have made is undone by the Holy Spirit, the blessed
residue is restored and therefore continues in creation.

^60^ What is truly blessed is incapable of giving rise to guilt and
*must* give rise to joy. This makes it invulnerable to the ego because
its peace is unassailable. It is invulnerable to disruption *because* it
is whole. Guilt is *always* disruptive. Anything that engenders fear is
divisive because it obeys the law of division. If the ego is the symbol
of the separation, it is also the symbol of guilt. Guilt is more than
merely not of God. It is the symbol of the *attack* on God. This is a
totally meaningless concept *except* to the ego, but do not
underestimate the power of the ego's belief in it. This is the belief
from which *all* guilt really stems.

^61^ The ego *is* the part of the mind which believes in division. How
can part of God detach itself *without* believing it is attacking Him?
We spoke before of the authority problem as involving the concept of
*usurping* God's power. The ego believes that this is what *you* did
because it believes it *is* you. It follows, then, that if you identify
*with* the ego, you *must* perceive yourself as guilty. Whenever you
respond to your ego, you *will* experience guilt and you *will* fear
punishment. The ego is quite literally a fearful thought.

^62^ However ridiculous the idea of attacking God may be to the *sane*
mind, never forget that the ego is *not* sane. It represents a
delusional system, and it speaks *for* it. Listening to the ego's voice
*means* that you believe it is possible to attack God. You believe that
a part of Him has been torn away by *you*. The classic picture of fear
of retaliation *from without* then follows because the severity of the
guilt is so acute that it *must* be projected. Although Freud was wrong
about the basic conflict itself, he was very accurate in describing its
effects.

^63^ Whatever you accept *into* your mind has reality for you. It is,
however, only your *acceptance* of it that makes it real. If you
enthrone the ego in it, the fact that you have accepted it or allowed it
to enter *makes* it your reality. This is because the mind, as God
created it, *is* capable of creating reality. We said before that you
must learn to think *with* God. To think with Him is to think *like*
Him. This engenders joy, not guilt, because it is natural. Guilt is a
sure sign that your thinking is *un*natural. Perverted thinking will
*always* be attended with guilt because it *is* the belief in sin.

^64^ The ego does not perceive sin as a lack of love. It perceives sin
as a *positive act of assault*. This is an interpretation which is
necessary to the ego's survival because as soon as you regard sin as a
*lack* you will automatically attempt to remedy the situation. And you
will succeed. The ego regards this as doom, but *you* must learn to
regard it as freedom. The guiltless mind *cannot* suffer. Being sane, it
heals the body because *it* has been healed. The sane mind cannot
conceive of illness because it cannot conceive of attacking anyone or
anything.

^65^ We said before that illness is a form of magic. It might be better
to say that it is a form of magical solution. The ego believes that by
punishing *itself* it will mitigate the punishment of God. Yet even in
this it is arrogant. It attributes to God a punishing intent, and then
takes over this intent as its *own* prerogative. It tries to usurp *all*
the functions of God as it perceives them because it recognizes that
only total allegiance can be trusted.

^66^ The ego cannot *oppose* the laws of God any more than *you* can,
but it can *interpret* them according to what it wants, just as *you*
can. That is why the question, "What *do* you want?" must be answered.
You *are* answering it every minute and every second, and each moment of
decision is a judgment which is anything *but* ineffectual. Its effects
will follow automatically *until the decision is changed*. This is
repeated here because you have not learned it. But again, your decision
can be *unmade* as well as made. Remember, though, that the
*alternatives* are unalterable.

^67^ The Holy Spirit, like the ego, is a decision. Together they
constitute all the alternatives which the mind can accept and obey. The
ego and the Holy Spirit are the *only* choices open to you. God created
one, and so you *cannot* eradicate it. *You* made the other, and so you
*can*. *Only* what God creates is irreversible and unchangeable. What
*you* have made can always be changed because when you do not think
*like* God you are not really thinking at all. Delusional ideas are not
real thoughts, although you *can* believe in them. But you are wrong.
The function of thought comes *from* God and is *in* God. As part of His
Thought, you cannot think *apart* from Him.

^68^ Irrational thought is a thought *disorder.* God Himself orders your
thought because your thought was created *by* Him. Guilt feelings are
always a sign that you do not know this. They also show that you believe
you can think apart from God *and want to*. Every thought disorder is
attended by guilt at its inception and maintained by guilt in its
continuance. Guilt is inescapable for those who believe they order their
own thought and must therefore obey its orders. This makes them feel
*responsible* for their mind errors, without recognizing that by
*accepting* this responsibility they are really reacting irresponsibly.
If the *sole* responsibility of the miracle worker is to accept the
Atonement for himself, and I assure you that it is, then the
responsibility for what is atoned *for* cannot *be* yours.

^69^ The dilemma cannot be resolved except by accepting the solution of
*undoing.* You *would* be responsible for the effects of all your wrong
thinking if it could not be undone. The purpose of the Atonement is to
save the past in purified form only. If you accept the remedy for a
thought disorder, and a remedy whose efficacy is beyond doubt, how can
its symptoms remain? You have reason to question the validity of symptom
cure, but *no one* believes that the symptoms can remain if the
underlying *cause* is removed.
:::

[]{#part0010_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Eternal Fixation**](#part0004.html#level-34) {#part0010_split_007.html#h1-34 .level1a}

^70^ The *continuing* will to remain separated is the only possible
reason for continuing guilt feelings. We have said this before, but we
did not emphasize the destructive results of this decision at that time.
*Any* decision of the mind will affect both behavior *and* experience.
What you will, you *expect*. This is not delusional. Your mind *does*
create your future, and it can turn it back to full creation at any
minute *if it accepts the Atonement first*. It will also turn back to
full creation the instant it has done so. Having given up its thought
disorder, the proper ordering of thought becomes quite apparent.

^71^ God in His knowledge is not waiting, but His Kingdom is bereft
while *you* wait. All the Sons of God are waiting for your return, just
as *you* are waiting for *theirs*. Delay does not matter in eternity,
but it *is* tragic in time. You have elected to be in time rather than
eternity and have therefore changed your belief in your status. Yet your
election is both free and alterable. You do not belong in time. Your
place is *only* in eternity, where God Himself placed you forever.

^72^ Guilt feelings are the *preservers* of time. They induce fears of
future retaliation or abandonment and thus ensure that the future will
remain like the past. This is the ego's continuity and gives it a false
sense of security through the belief that you cannot escape from it. But
you can and *must*. God offers you the continuity of eternity in
exchange. When you choose to make this exchange, you will simultaneously
exchange guilt for joy, viciousness for love, and pain for peace. My
role is only to unchain your will and make it free. Your ego cannot
accept this freedom and will oppose your free decision at every possible
moment and in every possible way. And as its maker, you recognize what
it can do because you *gave* it the power to do it.

^73^ The mind does indeed know its power because the mind does indeed
know God. Remember the Kingdom always, and remember that you who are
part of the Kingdom *cannot* be lost. The mind that was in me *is* in
you, for God creates with perfect fairness. Let the Holy Spirit remind
you always of His fairness, and let me teach you how to share it with
your brothers. How else can the chance to claim it for yourself be given
you? What you do not understand is that the two voices speak for
different interpretations of the same thing simultaneously, or almost
simultaneously, for the ego always speaks first. Alternate
interpretations were unnecessary until the first one was made, and
speaking itself was unnecessary before the ego was made.

^74^ The ego speaks in judgment and the Holy Spirit reverses its
decisions, much as the Supreme Court has the power to reverse the lower
courts decisions about the laws of this world. The ego's decisions are
*always* wrong because they are based on a complete fallacy which they
were made to uphold. *Nothing* the ego perceives is interpreted
correctly. Not only does it cite Scripture for its purpose, but it even
interprets Scripture as a witness for itself. The Bible is a fearful
thing to the ego because of its prejudiced judgment. Perceiving it as
fearful, it interprets it fearfully. Having made *you* afraid, you do
not appeal to the Higher Court because you believe its judgment would be
*against* you.

^75^ We need cite only a few examples to see how the ego's
interpretations have misled you. A favorite ego quotation is "As ye sow,
so shall ye reap." Another is "Vengeance is mine, sayeth the Lord."
Still another is "I will visit the sins of the father unto the third and
fourth generation," and also "The wicked shall perish." There are many
others, but if you will let the Holy Spirit reinterpret these in His own
light, they will suffice.

^76^ "As ye sow, so shall ye reap" merely means that what you believe to
be worth cultivating you will cultivate in yourself. Your judgment of
what is worthy *makes* it worthy for you. "Vengeance is mine, sayeth the
Lord" is easily explained if you remember that ideas increase only by
being shared. This quotation therefore emphasizes the fact that
vengeance *cannot* be shared. Give it therefore to the Holy Spirit, who
will undo it in you because it does not belong in your mind, which is
part of God.

^77^ "I will visit the sins of the fathers unto the third and fourth
generation," as interpreted by the ego, is particularly vicious. It is
used, in fact, as an attempt to guarantee its survival beyond itself.
Actually, all the quotation means is that the Holy Spirit in later
generations retains the power to interpret *correctly* what former
generations have thought and thus release *their* thoughts from the
ability to produce fear anywhere in the Sonship. "The wicked shall
perish" is merely a statement of fact if the word "perish" is properly
understood. Every loveless thought *must* be undone. Even the word
"undone" is fearful to the ego, which interprets "I am undone" as "I am
destroyed."

^78^ The ego will *not* be destroyed because it is part of your thought,
but because it is uncreative and therefore unsharing, it *will* be
reinterpreted entirely to release you from fear. The part of your
thought which you have given to the ego will merely return to the
Kingdom, where your whole mind *belongs*. The ego is a form of arrest,
but arrest is merely delay. It does *not* involve the concept of
punishment, although the ego welcomes that interpretation. You *can*
delay the completion of the Kingdom, but you *cannot* introduce the
concept of assault into it.

^79^ When I said, "I am come as a light into the world," I surely came
to share the light with you. Remember the symbolic reference we made
before to the ego's dark glass, and remember also that we said, "Do not
look there." It is still true that "where you look to find yourself is
up to you." The Higher Court will *not* condemn you. It will merely
dismiss the case against you. There can *be* no case against a Child of
God, and every witness to guilt in God's creations is bearing false
witness to God Himself.

^80^ Appeal everything you believe gladly to God's own Higher Court
because it speaks for Him and therefore speaks truly. It will dismiss
the case against you, however carefully *you* have built it. The case
may be foolproof, but it is *not* God-proof. The Voice for God will not
hear it at all because He can only witness truly. His verdict will
always be "Thine is the Kingdom" because He was *given* you to remind
you of what you are.

^81^ Your patience with each other is your patience with yourselves. Is
not a Child of God *worth* patience? I have shown you infinite patience
because my will *is* that of our Father, from Whom I learned of infinite
patience. His Voice was in me as it is in you, speaking for patience
towards the Sonship in the name of its Creator. What you need to learn
now is that only infinite patience *can* produce immediate effects. This
is the way in which time is exchanged for eternity. Infinite patience
calls upon infinite love, and by producing results *now,* it renders
time unnecessary.

^82^ To say that time is temporary is merely redundant. We have
repeatedly said that time is a learning device which will be abolished
when it is no longer useful. The Holy Spirit, Who speaks for God in
time, also knows that time is meaningless. He reminds you of this in
every passing moment of time because it is His special function to
return you to eternity and remain to bless *your* creations there. He is
the only blessing you can truly give because He is so truly blessed, and
because He has been given you so freely by God, you must give Him as you
received Him.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Six**](#part0004.html#chap-6) {#part0011_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Attack and Fear**](#part0004.html#chap-6) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-35) {#part0011_split_000.html#h1-35 .level1a1}

^6:1^ The relationship of anger to attack is obvious, but the inevitable
association of anger and *fear* is not always so clear. Anger *always*
involves *projection of separation*, which must ultimately be accepted
as entirely one's own responsibility. Anger cannot occur unless you
believe that you have been attacked, that your attack was justified, and
that *you* are in no way responsible. Given these three wholly
irrational premises, the equally irrational conclusion that a brother is
*worthy* of attack rather than of love follows. What can be expected
from insane premises except an insane conclusion?

^2^ The way to undo an insane conclusion is to consider the sanity of
the premises on which it rests. You cannot *be* attacked; attack *has*
no justification; and you *are* responsible for what you believe. You
have been asked to take me as your model for learning since an extreme
example is a particularly helpful learning device. Everyone teaches and
teaches all the time. This is a responsibility which he inevitably
assumes the moment he accepts any premise at all, and no one can
organize his life without *any* thought system. Once he has developed a
thought system of any kind, he lives by it *and teaches it.*

^3^ You have been chosen to teach the Atonement precisely because you
have been extreme examples of allegiance to your thought systems and
therefore have developed the *capacity* for allegiance. It has indeed
been misplaced, but it *is* a form of faith which you yourselves have
been willing to redirect. You cannot doubt the strength of your devotion
when you consider how faithfully you have observed it. It was quite
evident that you had already developed the ability to follow a better
model if you could accept it.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Message of the Crucifixion**](#part0004.html#level-36) {#part0011_split_001.html#h1-36 .level1a}

^4^ For teaching purposes, let us consider the crucifixion again. We
have not dwelt on it before because of its fearful connotations. The
only emphasis we laid upon it was that it was *not* a form of
punishment. Nothing, however, can be really explained in negative terms
only. There is a positive interpretation of the crucifixion which is
wholly devoid of fear and therefore wholly benign in what it teaches if
it is properly understood. The crucifixion is nothing more than an
extreme example. Its value, like the value of any teaching device, lies
solely in the kind of learning it facilitates. It can be and has been
misunderstood. This is only because the fearful are apt to perceive
fearfully.

^5^ I have already told you that you can always call on me to share my
decision and thus *make it stronger*. I also told you that the
crucifixion was the last foolish journey that the Sonship need take and
that it should mean *release* from fear to anyone who understands it.
While we emphasized only the resurrection before, the purpose of the
crucifixion and how it actually *led* to the resurrection was not
clarified at that time. Nevertheless, it has a definite contribution to
make to your own lives, and if you will consider it *without* fear, it
will help you understand your own role as teachers.

^6^ You have reacted for years *as if* you were being crucified. This is
a marked tendency of the separated ones, who always refuse to consider
what they have done *to themselves*. Projection means anger, anger
fosters assault, and assault promotes fear. The real meaning of the
crucifixion lies in the *apparent* intensity of the assault of some of
the Sons of God upon another. This, of course, is impossible and must be
fully understood *as* an impossibility. In fact unless it *is* fully
understood as only that, I cannot serve as a real model for learning.

^7^ Assault can ultimately be made *only* on the body. There is little
doubt that one *body* can assault another and can even destroy it. Yet
if destruction *itself* is impossible, then anything that is
destructible cannot be *real*. Therefore, its destruction does *not*
justify anger. To the extent to which you believe that it *does*, you
must be accepting false premises *and teaching them to others*. The
message which the crucifixion was intended to teach was that it is not
necessary to perceive *any* form of assault in persecution because you
cannot *be* persecuted. If you respond with anger, you must be equating
yourself with the destructible and are therefore regarding yourself
insanely.

^8^ I have made it perfectly clear that I am like you and you are like
me, but our fundamental equality can be demonstrated only through joint
*decision*. You are free to perceive yourselves as persecuted if you
choose. You might remember, however, when you *do* choose to react that
way, that I *was* persecuted as the world judges and did *not* share
this evaluation for myself. And because I did not share it, I did not
*strengthen* it. I therefore offered a *different* interpretation of
attack and one which I *do* want to share with you. If you will
*believe* it, you will help me to *teach* it.

^9^ We have said before, "As you teach so shall you learn." If you react
as if you are persecuted, you are *teaching* persecution. This is not a
lesson which the Sons of God should *want* to teach if they are to
realize their own salvation. Rather, teach your own perfect immunity,
which *is* the truth in you, and *know* that it cannot be assailed. Do
not protect it yourselves, or you have believed that it *is* assailable.
You are not asked to *be* crucified, which was part of my own teaching
contribution. You are merely asked to follow my example in the face of
much *less* extreme temptations to misperceive and *not* to accept them
falsely as justifications for anger.

^10^ There can *be* no justification for the unjustifiable. Do not
believe there is, and do not *teach* that there is. Remember always that
what you believe you *will* teach. Believe with me, and we will become
equal as teachers. *Your* resurrection is your reawakening. I am the
model for rebirth, but rebirth itself is merely the dawning on your
minds of what is already in them. God placed it there Himself, and so it
is true forever. I believed in it and therefore made it forever true for
me. Help me to teach it to our brothers in the name of the Kingdom of
God, but first believe that it is true for *you*, or you will teach
amiss.

^11^ My brothers slept during the so-called "agony" in the garden, but I
could not be angry with them because I had learned I could not *be*
abandoned. Peter swore he would never deny me, but he did so three
times. He did offer to defend me with the sword, which I naturally
refused, not being at all in need of bodily protection. I *am* sorry
when my brothers do not share my decision to hear only one voice,
because it weakens them as teachers *and* as learners. Yet I know that
they cannot really betray themselves *or* me and that it is still on
them that I must build my church.

^12^ There is no choice in this because only you can *be* the foundation
of God's church. A church is where an altar is, and the presence of the
altar is what *makes* it a church. Any church which does not inspire
love has a hidden altar which is not serving the purpose for which God
intended it. I must found His church on you because you who accept me as
a model are literally my disciples. Disciples are followers, but if the
model they follow has chosen to save them pain in all respects, they are
probably unwise *not* to follow him.

^13^ I elected both for your sake *and* mine to demonstrate that the
most outrageous assault as judged by the ego did not matter. As the
world judges these things, but *not* as God *knows* them, I was
betrayed, abandoned, beaten, torn, and finally killed. It was perfectly
clear that this was only because of the projection of others, because I
had not harmed anyone and had healed many. We are still equal as
learners, even though we need not have equal experiences. The Holy
Spirit is glad when you can learn enough from mine to be re-awakened by
them. That was their only purpose, and that is the only way in which I
can be perceived as the Way, the Truth, and the Light.

^14^ When you hear only one voice, you are *never* called on to
sacrifice. On the contrary, by enabling yourselves to hear the Holy
Spirit in others, you can learn from their experiences and gain from
them *without* experiencing them yourselves. That is because the Holy
Spirit is one, and anyone who listens is inevitably led to demonstrate
His way for all. You are not persecuted, nor was I. You are not asked to
*repeat* my experiences because the Holy Spirit, Whom we *share*, makes
this unnecessary. To *use* my experiences constructively, however, you
must still follow my example in how to perceive them.

^15^ My brothers and yours are constantly engaged in justifying the
unjustifiable. My one lesson, which I must teach as I learned, is that
no perception which is out of accord with the judgment of the Holy
Spirit *can* be justified. I undertook to show this was true in a very
extreme case merely because it would serve as a good teaching aid to
those whose temptations to give in to anger and assault would *not* be
so extreme. I will with God that none of His Sons should suffer.

^16^ Remember that the Holy Spirit is the communication link between God
the Father and His separated Sons. If you will listen to His Voice, you
will know that you cannot either hurt or *be* hurt and that many need
your blessing to help them hear this for themselves. When you perceive
*only* this need in them and do not respond to *any* other, you will
have learned of me and will be as eager to share your learning as I am.
The crucifixion *cannot* be shared, because it is the symbol of
projection, but the resurrection is the symbol of *sharing,* because the
reawakening of every Son of God is necessary to enable the Sonship to
know its wholeness. Only this *is* knowledge.

^17^ The message of the crucifixion is perfectly clear:

^18^ Teach only love, for that is what you are.

^19^ If you interpret the crucifixion in any other way, you are using it
as a weapon for assault rather than as the call for peace for which it
was intended. The Apostles often misunderstood it and always for the
same reason that makes anyone misunderstand anything. Their own
imperfect love made them vulnerable to projection, and out of their own
fear they spoke of the "wrath of God" as His retaliatory weapon. Nor
could they speak of the crucifixion entirely without anger, because
their own sense of guilt had *made* them angry.

^20^ There are two glaring examples of upside-down thinking in the New
Testament, whose whole gospel is *only* the message of love. These are
not like the several slips into impatience which I made. I had learned
the Atonement prayer, which I also came to teach, too well to engage in
upside-down thinking myself. If the Apostles had not felt guilty, they
never could have quoted me as saying, "I come not to bring peace but a
sword." This is clearly the exact opposite of everything I taught.

^21^ Nor could they have described my reactions to Judas as they did if
they had really understood me. They would have realized I *could* not
have said, "Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?" unless I
*believed* in betrayal. The whole message of the crucifixion was simply
that I did *not*. The "punishment" which I am said to have called forth
upon Judas was a similar reversal. Judas was my brother and a Son of
God, as much a part of the Sonship as myself. Was it likely that I would
condemn him when I was ready to demonstrate that condemnation is
impossible?

^22^ I am very grateful to the Apostles for their teaching and fully
aware of the extent of their devotion to me. Nevertheless, as you read
their teachings, remember that I told them myself that there was much
they would understand later because they were *not* wholly ready to
follow me at the time. I emphasize this only because I do not want you
to allow *any* fear to enter into the thought system toward which I am
guiding you. I do *not* call for martyrs but for *teachers*. No one is
"punished" for sins, and the Sons of God are not sinners.

^23^ *Any* concept of "punishment" involves the projection of blame and
*reinforces* the idea that blame is justified. The behavior that results
is a *lesson in blame*, just as all behavior teaches the beliefs which
motivate it. The crucifixion was a complex of behaviors arising out of
clearly opposed thought systems. As such, it was the perfect symbol of
conflict between the ego and the Son of God. The conflict is just as
real now, and its lessons, too, have equal reality *when they are
learned*. I do not need gratitude any more than I needed protection, but
you need to develop your weakened ability to *be* grateful, or you
cannot appreciate God. He does not need your appreciation, but *you* do.

^24^ You cannot love what you do not appreciate, and *fear makes
appreciation impossible*. Whenever you are afraid of what you are, you
do *not* appreciate it and will therefore reject it. As a result, you
will *teach rejection*. The power of the Sons of God is operating all
the time because they were created as creators. Their influence on *each
other* is without limit and *must* be used for their joint salvation.
Each one must learn to teach that all forms of rejection are utterly
meaningless. The separation *is* the notion of rejection. As long as you
*teach* this, you still believe it. This is *not* as God thinks, and you
must think as He thinks if you are to know Him again.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Uses of Projection**](#part0004.html#level-37) {#part0011_split_002.html#h1-37 .level1a}

^25^ Any split in will *must* involve a rejection of part of it, and
this *is* the belief in separation. The wholeness of God, which *is* His
peace, cannot be appreciated *except* by a whole mind which recognizes
the wholeness of God's creation and *by* this recognition knows its
Creator. Exclusion and separation are synonymous, as are separation and
dissociation. We have said before that the separation was and *is*
dissociation and also that, once it had occurred, projection became its
main defense or the device that *keeps it going*. The reason, however,
may not be as clear as you think.

^26^ In the ego's use of projection, to which we are obviously
referring, what you project you disown and therefore *do not believe is
yours*. You are *excluding* yourself by the very statement you are
making that you are *different* from the one on whom you project. Since
you have also judged *against* what you project, you continue to attack
it because you have already attacked it *by* projecting it. By doing
this unconsciously, you try to keep the fact that you must have attacked
yourself *first* out of awareness and thus imagine that you have made
yourself safe.

^27^ Projection will *always* hurt you. It reinforces your belief in
your own split mind, and its *only* purpose is *to keep the separation
going*. It is *solely* a device of the ego to make you feel *different*
from your brothers and separated from them. The ego justifies this on
the wholly spurious grounds that it makes you seem "better" than they
are, thus obscuring your equality with them still further. Projection
and attack are inevitably related because projection is *always* a means
of justifying attack. Anger without projection is impossible.

^28^ The ego uses projection *only* to distort your perception both of
yourself *and* your brothers. The process begins by excluding something
\[you think\] exists in you which you do not want and leads directly to
excluding you from your brothers. We have learned, however, that there
is another use of projection. Every ability of the ego has a better
counterpart, because its abilities are directed by the mind which has a
better Voice. The Holy Spirit as well as the ego utilizes projection,
but since their goals are opposed so is the result.

^29^ The Holy Spirit begins by perceiving *you* as perfect. *Knowing*
this perfection is shared, He recognizes it in others, thus
strengthening it in both. Instead of anger, this arouses love for both,
*because it establishes inclusion*. Perceiving equality, the Holy Spirit
perceives equal needs. This invites Atonement automatically, because
Atonement is the one need which in this world *is* universal. To
perceive yourself this way is the *only* way in which you can find
happiness in the world. That is because it is the acknowledgment that
you are *not* in this world, for the world *is* unhappy.

^30^ How else can you find joy in a joyless place *except* by realizing
that you are *not* there? You cannot be anywhere that God did not put
you, and God created you as part of Him. That is both *where* you are
and *what* you are. It is *completely* unalterable. It is total
inclusion. You cannot change it now or ever. It is forever true. It is
not a belief but a *fact*. Anything that God created is as true as He
is. Its truth lies only in its perfect inclusion in Him, Who alone *is*
perfect. To deny this in any way is to deny yourself *and* Him since it
is impossible to accept one *without* the other.

^31^ The perfect equality of the Holy Spirit's perception is the
counterpart of the perfect equality of God's knowing. The ego's
perception *has* no counterpart in God, but the Holy Spirit remains the
bridge between perception and knowledge. By enabling you to use
perception in a way that *parallels* knowledge, you will ultimately meet
it and *know* it. The ego would prefer to believe that this meeting is
impossible, yet it is *your* perception which the Holy Spirit guides.
You might remember that the human eye perceives parallel lines *as if*
they meet in the distance, which is the same as in the future if time
and space are one dimension. Your perception *will* end where it began.
*Everything* meets in God because everything was created *by* Him and
*in* Him.

^32^ God created His Sons by extending His thought and retaining the
extensions of His Thought in His Mind. *All* His Thoughts are thus
perfectly united within themselves and with each other because they were
created neither partially nor in part. The Holy Spirit enables you *to
perceive this wholeness now*. You can no more pray for yourselves alone
than you can find joy for yourself alone. Prayer is the restatement of
*inclusion,* directed by the Holy Spirit under the laws of God. God
created you to create. You cannot *extend* His Kingdom until you know of
its wholeness.

^33^ Thoughts begin in the mind of the thinker from which they reach
outward. This is as true of God's Thinking as it is of yours. Because
your minds are split, you can also perceive as well as think. Yet
perception cannot escape from the basic laws of mind. You perceive
*from* your mind and extend your perceptions outward. Although
perception of any kind is unnecessary, *you* made it, and the Holy
Spirit can therefore use it well. He can *inspire* perception and lead
it toward God by making it *parallel* to God's way of thinking and thus
guarantee their ultimate meeting. This convergence *seems* to be far in
the future only because your mind is not in perfect alignment with the
idea and therefore *does not want it now*.

^34^ The Holy Spirit *uses* time but does *not* believe in it. Coming
from God, He uses everything for good, but He does not *believe* in what
is not true. Since the Holy Spirit is *in* your minds, your minds must
also be able to believe only what is true. The Holy Spirit can speak
only for this because he speaks for God. He tells you to return your
whole mind to God because it has *never left Him*. If it has never left
Him, you need only perceive it as it is to *be* returned. The full
awareness of the Atonement, then, is the recognition *that the
separation never occurred.* The ego cannot prevail against this because
it is an explicit statement that the *ego* never occurred.

^35^ The ego *can* accept the idea that return is necessary because it
can so easily make the idea seem so difficult. Yet the Holy Spirit tells
you that even return is unnecessary because what never happened cannot
involve *any* problem. It does *not* follow, however, that *you* cannot
make the idea of return necessary *and* difficult. It is surely clear,
however, that the perfect *need* nothing and *cannot* experience
perfection as a difficult accomplishment, because that is what they
*are.*

^36^ This is the way in which you *must* perceive God's creations,
bringing all of your perceptions into the one parallel line which the
Holy Spirit sees. This line is the direct line of communication with God
and lets your mind converge with *His*. There is no conflict anywhere in
this perception because it means that *all* perception is guided by the
Holy Spirit, Whose mind is fixed on God. *Only* the Holy Spirit can
resolve conflict, because *only* the Holy Spirit is conflict-free. He
perceives *only* what is true in your mind and extends outward *only* to
what is true in other minds.

^37^ The difference between the ego's use of projection and projection
as the Holy Spirit uses it is very simple. The ego projects to *exclude*
and therefore to deceive. The Holy Spirit projects by *recognizing
Himself* in every mind and thus perceives them as *one*. Nothing
conflicts in this perception, because what the Holy Spirit perceives
*is* the same. Wherever He looks He sees Himself, and because He is
united, He offers the whole Kingdom always. This is the one message God
gave *to* Him and for which He must speak because that is what He *is*.
The peace of God lies in that message, and so the peace of God lies in
*you*.

^38^ The great peace of the Kingdom shines in your mind forever, but it
must shine *outward* to make *you* aware of it. The Holy Spirit was
given you with perfect impartiality, and only by perceiving Him
impartially can you perceive Him at all. The ego is legion, but the Holy
Spirit is One. No darkness abides anywhere in the Kingdom, but your part
is only to allow no darkness to abide in your *own* mind. This alignment
with light is unlimited, because it is in alignment with the light of
the world. Each of us *is* the light of the world, and by joining our
minds *in* this light, we proclaim the Kingdom of God together and *as
one*.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Relinquishment of Attack**](#part0004.html#level-38) {#part0011_split_003.html#h1-38 .level1a}

^39^ We have used many words as synonymous which are not ordinarily
regarded as the same. We began with having and being and more recently
have used others. Hearing and being are examples, to which we can also
add teaching and being, learning and being and, above all, *projecting*
and being. This is because, as we have said before, every idea begins in
the mind of the thinker and extends outward. Therefore, what extends
*from* the mind *is still in it,* and from what it extends it knows
*itself*. That is its natural talent. The word "knows" is correct here,
even though the ego does *not* know and is not concerned with being at
all.

^40^ The Holy Spirit still holds knowledge safe through His impartial
perception. By attacking nothing, He presents no barrier at all to the
communication of God. Thus, being is never threatened. Your Godlike mind
can never *be* defiled. The ego never was and never will be part of it,
but *through* the ego you can hear and teach and learn *what is not
true*. From this, which *you* have made, you have taught yourselves to
believe that you *are not* what you *are.* You *cannot* teach what you
have not learned, and what you teach you strengthen in yourselves
*because* you are sharing it. Every lesson you teach *you* are learning.

^41^ That is why you must teach only *one* lesson. If you are to be
conflict-free yourselves, you must learn *only* from the Holy Spirit and
teach *only* by Him. You *are* only love, but when you denied this you
made what you *are* something you must *learn*. We said before that the
message of the crucifixion was, "Teach only love, for that is what you
*are*." This is the *one* lesson which is perfectly unified because it
is the only lesson which *is* one. Only *by* teaching it can you learn
it. "As you teach, so will you learn." If that is true, and it is true
indeed, you must never forget that what you teach is teaching *you*.
What you project you *believe*.

^42^ The only *real* safety lies in projecting only the Holy Spirit
because, as you see His gentleness in others, your *own* mind perceives
*itself* as totally harmless. Once it can accept this fully, it does
*not* see the need to *protect itself.* The protection of God then dawns
upon it, assuring it that it is perfectly safe forever. The perfectly
safe are wholly benign. They bless because they know they *are* blessed.
Without anxiety the mind is wholly kind and because it *projects*
beneficence, it *is* beneficent.

^43^ Safety is *the complete relinquishment of attack*. No compromise is
possible in this. Teach attack in *any* form, and *you have learned it,
and it will hurt you.* Yet your learning is not immortal, and you can
unlearn it by *not teaching it*. Since you cannot *not* teach, your
salvation lies in teaching the exact *opposite* of everything the ego
believes. This is how *you* will learn the truth that will set you free
and keep you so, as others learn it of *you.* The only way to *have*
peace is to *teach* peace. By learning it through projection it becomes
a part of what you *know* because you cannot teach what you have
dissociated.

^44^ Only thus can you win back the knowledge that you threw away. An
idea which you *share* you must *have*. It awakens in you through the
conviction of teaching. Remember that, if teaching is being and learning
is being, teaching is learning. *Everything* you teach you are learning.
Teach only love, and learn that love is yours, and *you* are love.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Only Answer**](#part0004.html#level-39) {#part0011_split_004.html#h1-39 .level1a}

^45^ Remember that the Holy Spirit is the *Answer, not* the question.
The ego always speaks first because it is capricious and does *not* mean
its maker well. That is because it believes, and correctly, that its
maker may withdraw his support from it at any moment. If it meant you
well, it would be glad, as the Holy Spirit will be glad when He has
brought you home, and you no longer need His guidance. The ego does not
regard itself as *part* of you. Herein lies its primary perceptual
error, the foundation of its whole thought system.

^46^ When God created you, He made you part of Him. That is why attack
*within* the Kingdom is impossible. *You* made the ego without love, and
so it does not love *you*. You could not remain *within* the Kingdom
without love, and since the Kingdom is love, you believe that you are
*without* it. This enables the ego to regard itself as separate and
*outside* its maker, thus speaking for the part of your mind that
believes you are separate and outside the Mind of God. The ego, then,
raised the first question that was ever asked, but one which it can
never answer. That question, "What are you?" was the beginning of doubt.

^47^ The ego has never answered *any* questions since, although it has
raised a great many. The most inventive activities of the ego have never
done more than *obscure the question* because you *have* the answer and
*the ego is afraid of you*. You cannot understand the conflict until you
fully understand one basic fact that the ego does *not* know. The Holy
Spirit does not speak first, *but He always answers*. Everyone has
called upon Him for help at one time or another and in one way or
another *and has been answered*. Since the Holy Spirit answers truly, He
answers *for all time*, which means that everyone has the answer *now*.

^48^ The ego cannot hear the Holy Spirit, but it *does* believe that
part of the same mind that made it is *against* it. It interprets this
as a justification for *attacking* its maker. It believes that the best
defense *is* attack and *wants you to believe it*. Unless you *do*
believe it you will not side with it, and the ego feels badly in need of
allies though *not* of brothers. Perceiving something alien to itself in
your mind, the ego turns to the body, *not* the mind, as its ally
because the body is *not* part of you. This makes the body the ego's
friend. It is an alliance frankly based on separation. If you *side*
with this alliance, you *will* be afraid because you are siding with an
alliance of fear.

^49^ The ego and the body conspire *against* your minds, and because the
ego realizes that its "enemy" *can* end them both merely by knowing they
are *not* part of him, they join in the attack together. This is perhaps
the strangest perception of all if you consider what it really involves.
The ego, which is *not* real, attempts to persuade the mind, which *is*
real, that the mind is its own learning device and that the learning
device is more real than *it* is. No one in his right mind could
*possibly* believe this, and no one in his right mind *does* believe it.

^50^ Hear then the *one* answer of the Holy Spirit to *all* the
questions which the ego raises. You are a Child of God, a priceless part
of His Kingdom, which He created as part of Him. Nothing else exists,
and *only* this is real. You have chosen a sleep in which you have had
bad dreams, but the sleep is not real, and God calls you to awake. There
will be nothing left of your dream when you hear Him because you *will*
be awake. Your dreams have contained many of the ego's symbols, and they
have confused you. Yet that was only because you were asleep *and did
not know*. When you awake, you will see the truth around you and in you,
and you will no longer believe in dreams because they will have no
reality for you.

^51^ Yet the Kingdom and all that you have created there will have great
reality for you because they are beautiful and true. In the Kingdom,
where you are and what you are is perfectly certain. There is no doubt
there because the first question was never asked. Having finally been
wholly answered, *it has never been*. Being alone lives in the Kingdom,
where everything lives in God without question. The time that was spent
on questioning in the dream has given way to creation and to its
eternity.

^52^ *You* are as certain as God because you are as true as He is, but
what was once quite certain in your minds has become only the *ability*
for certainty. The introduction of abilities into being was the
beginning of *un*certainty because abilities are potentials, *not*
accomplishments. Your abilities are totally useless in the presence of
God's accomplishments and also of yours. Accomplishments are results
which *have been* achieved. When they are perfect, abilities are
meaningless. It is curious that the perfect must now be perfected. In
fact, it is impossible. You must remember, however, that when you put
yourselves in an impossible situation, you believed that the impossible
*was* possible.

^53^ Abilities must be *developed*, or you cannot use them. This is not
true of anything that God created, but it is the kindest solution
possible to what *you* have made. In an impossible situation, you can
develop your abilities to the point where they can *get you out of it*.
You have a Guide to how to develop them, but you have no *commander*
except yourself. This leaves *you* in charge of the Kingdom with both a
Guide to *find* it and a means to *keep* it. You have a model to follow
who will *strengthen* your command and never detract from it in any way.
You therefore retain the central place in your perceived enslavement, a
fact which *itself* demonstrates that you are *not* enslaved.

^54^ You are in an impossible situation only because you thought it was
possible to be in one. You *would* be in an impossible situation if God
showed you your perfection and *proved* to you that you were wrong. This
would demonstrate that the perfect were inadequate to bring *themselves*
to the awareness of their perfection and thus side with the belief that
those who have everything need help and are therefore helpless. This is
the kind of "reasoning" which the ego engages in, but God, Who *knows*
that His creations are perfect, does *not* insult them. This would be as
impossible as the ego's notion that *it* has insulted *Him.*

^55^ That is why the Holy Spirit *never* commands. To command is to
assume *in*equality, which the Holy Spirit demonstrates does not exist.
Fidelity to premises is a law of mind, and everything God created is
faithful to His laws. Fidelity to other laws is also possible, however,
not because the laws are true, but because *you made them*. What would
be gained if God proved to you that you have thought insanely? Can God
lose His own certainty? We have frequently stated that what you teach
you *are.* Would you have God teach you that you have sinned? If He
confronted the self you made with the truth He created for you, what
could you be but afraid? You would doubt your sanity, which is the one
thing in which you can *find* the sanity He gave you.

^56^ God does not teach. To teach is to imply a lack which God *knows*
is not there. God is not conflicted. Teaching aims at change, but God
created only the changeless. The separation was not a loss of perfection
but a failure in communication. A harsh and strident form of
communication arose as the ego's voice. It could not shatter the peace
of God, but it *could* shatter *yours.* God did not blot it out because
to eradicate it would be to attack it. Being questioned, He did not
question. He merely gave the Answer. His Answer is your Teacher.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**a. To Have, Give All to All**](#part0004.html#level-40) {#part0011_split_005.html#h1-40 .level1a}

^57^ Like any good teacher, the Holy Spirit does know more than you do
*now*, but He teaches only to make you *equal* with Him. This is because
you had already taught wrongly, having believed what was not true. *You
did not believe in your own perfection.* Could God teach you that you
had made a split mind, when He knows your mind only as whole? What God
*does* know is that His communication channels are not open to Him so
that He cannot impart His joy and know that His Children are wholly
joyous. This is an ongoing process, not in time, but in eternity. God's
extending outward, though not His completeness, is blocked when the
Sonship does not communicate with Him as one. So He thought, "My
Children sleep and must be awakened."

^58^ How can you wake children better and more kindly than by a gentle
Voice that will not frighten them but will merely remind them that the
night is over and the light has come? You do not inform them that the
nightmares which frightened them so badly were not real because children
*believe* in magic. You merely reassure them that they are safe *now*.
Then you train them to *recognize the difference* between sleeping and
waking, so that they will understand they need not be afraid of dreams.
Then when bad dreams come, they will call on the light *themselves* to
dispel them.

^59^ A wise teacher teaches through approach, *not* avoidance. He does
*not* emphasize what you must avoid to escape from harm so much as what
you need to learn to have joy. This is true even of the world's
teachers. Consider the confusion a child would experience if he were
told, "Do not do *this* because it might hurt you and make you unsafe,
but if you do *that* you will escape from harm and be safe, and then you
will not be afraid." All of this could be included in only three words:
"Do *only* that!" This simple statement is perfectly clear, easily
understood, and very easily remembered.

^60^ The Holy Spirit *never* itemizes errors because He does not
frighten children, and those who lack wisdom *are* children. Yet He
*always* answers their call, and His dependability makes *them* more
certain. Children *do* confuse fantasy and reality, and they *are*
frightened because they do not know the difference. The Holy Spirit
makes *no* distinction among dreams. He merely shines them away. His
light is *always* the call to awake, whatever you have been dreaming.
Nothing lasting lies in dreams, and the Holy Spirit, shining with the
light from God Himself, speaks only for what lasts forever.

^61^ When your body and your ego and your dreams are gone, you will know
that *you* will last forever. Many think this is accomplished through
death, but *nothing* is accomplished through death because death *is*
nothing. *Everything* is accomplished through life, and life is of the
mind and *in* the Mind. The body neither lives nor dies because it
cannot contain you who *are* life. If we share the same mind, you can
overcome death *because I did*. Death is an attempt to resolve conflict
by not willing at all. Like any other impossible solution which the ego
attempts, *it will not work*.

^62^ God did not make the body because it is destructible and therefore
not of the Kingdom. The body is the symbol of what you *think* you are.
It is clearly a separation device and therefore does not exist. The Holy
Spirit, as always, takes what you have made and translates it into a
learning device *for* you. Again as always, He re-interprets what the
ego uses as an argument *for* separation into a demonstration *against*
it. If the mind can heal the body but the body cannot heal the mind,
then the mind must be *stronger*. Every miracle demonstrates this.

^63^ We have said that the Holy Spirit is the *motivation* for miracles.
This is because He always tells you that *only* the mind is real since
*only* the mind *can be shared*. The body *is* separate and therefore
*cannot* be part of you. To be of one mind *is* meaningful, but to be of
one *body* is meaningless. By the laws of mind, then, the *body* is
meaningless. To the Holy Spirit, *there is no order of difficulty in
miracles.* This is *familiar* enough to you by now, but it has not yet
become believable. Therefore, you do not understand it and cannot *use*
it.

^64^ We have too much to accomplish on behalf of the Kingdom to let this
crucial concept slip away. It is a real foundation stone of the thought
system I teach and want *you* to teach. You cannot perform miracles
without believing it because it is a belief in perfect equality. Only
one equal gift *can* be offered to the equal Sons of God, and that is
*full appreciation*. Nothing more and nothing less. Without a range, an
order of difficulty *is* meaningless, and there must *be* no range in
what you offer to each other.

^65^ The Holy Spirit, who leads to God, translates communication into
being, just as He ultimately translates perception into knowledge. \[You
*do not lose what you communicate.*\] The ego uses the body for attack,
for pleasure, and for pride. The insanity of this perception makes it a
fearful one indeed. The Holy Spirit sees the body *only* as a means of
*communication* and because communicating is sharing, it becomes
communion. You might argue that fear as well as love can be communicated
and therefore can be shared. Yet this is not so real as it sounds. Those
who communicate fear are promoting attack, and attack always *breaks*
communication, making it impossible.

^66^ Egos *do* join together in temporary allegiance but always for
*what each one can get separately.* The Holy Spirit communicates only
*what each one can give to all*. He never takes anything back because He
wants *you* to keep it. Therefore, His teaching begins with the lesson:

^67^ To have, give all to all.

^68^ This is a very preliminary step, and the only one you must take for
yourself. It is not even necessary that you *complete* the step
yourself, but it *is* necessary that you turn in that direction. Having
chosen to go that way, you place *yourself* in charge of the journey,
where you and *only* you must remain.

^69^ This step *appears* to exacerbate conflict rather than resolve it
because it is the *beginning* step in reversing your perception and
turning it right-side up. This conflicts with the upside-down perception
which you have not yet abandoned, or the change in direction would not
have been necessary. Some people remain at this step for a very long
time, experiencing *very* acute conflict. At this point, many try to
accept the *conflict* rather than take the next step towards its
resolution. Having taken the first step, however, they *will* be helped.
Once they have chosen what they *cannot* complete alone, *they are no
longer alone.*
:::

[]{#part0011_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**b. To Have Peace, Teach Peace to Learn It**](#part0004.html#level-41) {#part0011_split_006.html#h1-41 .level1a}

^70^ All the separated ones have a basic fear of retaliation and
abandonment. This is because they *believe* in attack and rejection, so
this is what they perceive and teach and *learn*. These insane concepts
are clearly the result of their own dissociation and projection. What
you teach you are, but it is quite apparent that you can teach wrongly
and therefore *teach yourselves wrong*. Many thought that *I* was
attacking them, even though it was quite apparent that I was not. An
insane learner learns strange lessons.

^71^ What you must understand is that when you do not *share* a thought
system, you *are* weakening it. Those who *believe* in it therefore
perceive this as an attack *on them*. This is because everyone
identifies *himself* with his thought system, and *every* thought system
centers on *what you believe you are*. If the center of the thought
system is true, only truth extends from it. But if a lie is at its
center, only *deception* proceeds from it. All good teachers realize
that only fundamental change will last, but they do not *begin* at that
level. Strengthening *motivation* for change is their first and foremost
goal. It is also their last and final one.

^72^ Increasing motivation for change *in the learner* is all that a
teacher *need* do to guarantee change. This is because a change in
motivation *is* a change of mind, and this will inevitably produce
fundamental change because the mind *is* fundamental. The first step in
the reversal or undoing process, then, is the undoing of the *getting*
concept. Accordingly, the Holy Spirit's first lesson was "to *have*,
*give* all *to* all." We said that this is apt to increase conflict
temporarily, and we can clarify this still further now.

^73^ At this point, the equality of "having" and "being" is not yet
perceived. Until it *is,* "having" appears to be the *opposite* of
"being." Therefore, the first lesson *seems* to contain a contradiction
since it is being learned *by a conflicted mind.* This *means*
conflicting motivation, and so the lesson *cannot* be learned
consistently as yet. Further, the mind of the learner projects its own
split, and thus does *not* perceive consistent minds in others, making
him suspicious of *their* motivation. This is the real reason why in
many respects the first lesson is the hardest to learn. Still strongly
aware of the ego in himself and responding primarily to the ego in
others, he is being taught to react to both as if what he *does* believe
is *not* true.

^74^ Upside-down as always, the ego perceives the first lesson as
insane. In fact this is its only alternative here since the other one,
which would be much *less* acceptable to it, would obviously be that
*it* is insane. The ego's judgment, then, is predetermined by what it
*is*, though no more so than is any other product of thought. The
fundamental change will still occur with the change of mind *in the
thinker*. Meanwhile, the increasing clarity of the Holy Spirit's Voice
makes it impossible for the learner *not* to listen. For a time, then,
he *is* receiving conflicting messages *and accepting both*. This is the
classic "double bind" in communication.

^75^ The way *out* of conflict between two opposing thought systems is
clearly *to choose one* and *relinquish the other.* If you *identify*
with your thought system, and you cannot escape this, and if you accept
two thought systems which are in *complete* disagreement, peace of mind
*is* impossible. If you *teach* both, which you will surely do as long
as you *accept* both, you are teaching conflict and *learning* it. Yet
you *do* want peace, or you would not have called upon the Voice for
Peace to help you. His *lesson* is not insane; the *conflict* is.

^76^ There can *be* no conflict between sanity and insanity. Only one is
true, and therefore only one is *real*. The ego tries to persuade *you*
that it is up to you to decide which voice is true, but the Holy Spirit
teaches you that truth was created by God, and *your* decision *cannot*
change it. As you begin to realize the quiet power of the Holy Spirit's
Voice *and its perfect consistency,* it *must* dawn on your minds that
you are trying to undo a decision which was made irrevocably *for* you.
That is why we suggested before that there was help in reminding
yourselves to allow the Holy Spirit to decide for God for *you*.

^77^ You are *not* asked to make insane decisions, although you are free
to *think* you are. It *must*, however, be insane to believe that it *is
up to you* to decide what God's creations *are*. The Holy Spirit
perceives the conflict exactly as it is. Therefore, His second lesson
is:

^78^ To have peace, teach peace to learn it.

^79^ This is still a preliminary step since *having* and *being* are
still not equated. It is, however, more advanced than the first step,
which is really only a thought *reversal.* The second step is a positive
affirmation of *what you want.* This, then, is a step in the direction
*out* of conflict since it means that alternatives have been considered
and *one* has been chosen as *more desirable.*

^80^ Nevertheless, the evaluation "more desirable" still implies that
the desirable has *degrees.* Therefore, although this step is essential
for the ultimate decision, it is clearly *not* the final one. It is
clear at this point that the lack of order of difficulty in miracles has
not yet been accepted because nothing is difficult that is *wholly
desired*. To desire wholly is to *create,* and creating *cannot* be
difficult if God Himself created you *as* a creator. The second step,
then, is still perceptual, although it is a giant step toward the
unified perception which parallels God's knowing.

^81^ As you take this step and *hold this direction*, you will be
pushing toward the center of your thought system where the *fundamental*
change will occur. You are only beginning this step now, but you have
started on this way by realizing that *only one way is possible*. You do
not yet realize this consistently, and so your progress is intermittent,
but the second step is easier than the first because it *follows*. The
very fact that you have accepted *that* is a demonstration of your
growing awareness that the Holy Spirit *will* lead you on.
:::

[]{#part0011_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**c. Be Vigilant Only for God and His Kingdom**](#part0004.html#level-42) {#part0011_split_007.html#h1-42 .level1a}

^82^ For your own salvation you must be critical since your salvation
*is* critical to the whole Sonship. We said before that the Holy Spirit
is evaluative and *must* be. Yet His evaluation does not extend *beyond*
you, or you would share it. In *your* mind, and your mind *only,* He
sorts out the true from the false and teaches you to judge every thought
that you allow to enter your mind in the light of what God *put* there.
Whatever is *in accord* with this light, He retains to strengthen the
Kingdom in *you.* What is *partly* in accord with truth, He accepts and
purifies. But what is *out of accord* entirely, He rejects by judging
*against.* This is how He keeps the Kingdom perfectly consistent and
perfectly unified.

^83^ What you must remember, however, is that what the Holy Spirit
rejects the ego *accepts*. This is because they are in fundamental
disagreement about everything, being in fundamental disagreement about
*what you are*. The ego's beliefs on this crucial issue vary, and that
is why it promotes different moods. The Holy Spirit *never* varies on
this point, and so the *one* mood He engenders is joy. He *protects* it
by rejecting everything that does *not* foster joy, and so He alone can
keep you wholly joyous.

^84^ The Holy Spirit does not teach your mind to be critical of other
minds because He does not want you to teach errors *and learn them
yourselves*. He would hardly be consistent if He allowed you to
*strengthen* what you must learn to *avoid*. In the mind of the
*thinker*, then, He *is* judgmental, but only in order to unify the mind
so it can perceive without judgment. This enables the mind to *teach
without* judgment and therefore to learn to *be* without judgment. The
undoing is necessary only in *your* mind so that you cannot project
falsely. God Himself has established what you can project with perfect
safety. Therefore, the Holy Spirit's third lesson is:

^85^ Be vigilant only for God and His Kingdom.

^86^ This is a major step toward *fundamental* change. Yet it is still a
lesson in thought reversal since it implies that there is something you
must be vigilant *against*. It has advanced far from the first lesson,
which was *primarily* a reversal and also from the second, which was
essentially the identification of what is *more* desirable. *This* step,
which follows from the second as the second follows from the first,
emphasizes the *dichotomy* between the desirable and the undesirable. It
therefore makes the *ultimate* choice inevitable.

^87^ While the first step seems to *increase* conflict and the second
step still entails it to some extent, this one calls for *consistent
effort against it*. We said already that you can be as vigilant
*against* the ego as *for* it. This lesson teaches not only that you
*can* be, but that you *must* be. It does not concern itself with order
of difficulty but with *clear cut priority for vigilance*. This step is
unequivocal in that it teaches there must be *no* exceptions, although
it does not deny that the temptation to *make* exceptions will occur.
Here, then, your consistency is called on *despite* chaos. Yet chaos and
consistency *cannot* coexist for long since they are mutually exclusive.

^88^ As long as you must be vigilant against anything, however, you are
not recognizing this mutual exclusiveness and are holding the belief
that you can *choose either one*. By teaching *what* to choose, the Holy
Spirit will ultimately be able to teach you that *you need not choose at
all*. This will finally liberate your will *from* choice and direct it
towards creation *within* the Kingdom. Choosing through the Holy Spirit
will lead you *to* the Kingdom. You create by what you *are*, but this
is what you must learn. The way to learn it is inherent in the third
step, which brings together the lessons implied in the others and goes
beyond them towards real integration.

^89^ If you allow yourselves to have in your minds *only* what God put
there, you *are* acknowledging your mind as God created it. Therefore,
you are accepting it *as it is*. Since it is whole, you are teaching
peace *because* you believe in it. The final step will still be taken
*for* you by God, but by the third step the Holy Spirit has *prepared*
you for God. He is *getting you ready* for the translation of having
into being by the very nature of the steps you must take with Him.

^90^ You learn first that having rests on *giving* and *not* on getting.
Next you learn that you learn what you *teach* and that you *want to
learn peace*. This is the *condition* for identifying with the Kingdom
since it is the condition *of* the Kingdom. You have believed that you
are *without* the Kingdom and have therefore excluded yourself *from* it
in your belief. It is therefore essential to teach you that you must be
*included* and that the *belief* that you are *not* is the *only* thing
that you must exclude.

^91^ The third step is thus one of *protection* for your minds, allowing
you to identify *only* with the center, where God placed the altar to
Himself. We have already said that altars are beliefs, but God and His
creations are *beyond* belief because they are beyond question. The
Voice for God speaks only for *belief* beyond question, which is the
preparation for *being* without question. As long as belief in God and
His Kingdom is assailed by *any* doubts in your minds, His perfect
accomplishment is *not* apparent to you. This is why you must be
vigilant *on God's behalf*. The ego speaks *against* His creation and
therefore *does* engender doubt. You cannot go *beyond* belief until you
believe fully.

^92^ Transfer, which *is* extension, is a measure of learning because it
is its *measurable result.* This, however, does not mean that what it
transfers *to* is measurable. On the contrary, unless it transfers to
the whole Sonship, which is immeasurable because it was created *by* the
Immeasurable, the learning itself *must* be incomplete. To teach the
whole Sonship *without exception* demonstrates that you *perceive* its
wholeness and have learned that it *is* one. Now you must be vigilant to
*hold* its oneness in your minds because, if you let doubt enter, you
will lose awareness of its wholeness *and will be unable to teach it*.

^93^ The wholeness of the Kingdom does *not* depend on your perception,
but your *awareness* of its wholeness *does*. It is only your awareness
which *needs* protection since your being cannot *be* assailed. Yet a
real sense of being *cannot* be yours while you are doubtful of what you
*are*. *This is why vigilance is essential*. Doubts about being must not
enter your mind, or you *cannot* know what you are with certainty.
Certainty is *of* God for *you*. Vigilance is not necessary for truth,
but it *is* necessary against *illusions*.

^94^ Truth is *without* illusions and therefore *within* the Kingdom.
Everything *outside* the Kingdom *is* illusion, but you must learn to
accept truth because you threw it away. You therefore saw yourself *as
if* you were without it. By making another Kingdom which you *valued,*
you did not keep *only* the Kingdom of God in your minds and thus placed
part of your mind *outside* it. What you have made has thus divided your
will and given you a sick mind which *must* be healed. Your vigilance
*against* this sickness *is* the way to heal it. Once your mind is
healed, it radiates health and thereby *teaches* healing. This
establishes you as a teacher who teaches like me. Vigilance was required
of me as much as of you, but remember that those who will to teach the
same thing must be in agreement about what they believe.

^95^ The third step, then, is a statement of what you *want* to believe
and entails a willingness *to relinquish everything else*. I told you
that you were just beginning the second step, but I also told you that
the third one *follows* it. The Holy Spirit will enable you to go on if
you follow Him. Your vigilance is the sign that you *want* Him to guide
you. Vigilance does require effort, but only to teach you that effort
*itself* is unnecessary. You have exerted great effort to preserve what
you made *because* it was not true. Therefore, you must now turn your
effort *against* it. Only this can cancel out the *need* for effort and
call upon the *being* which you both *have* and *are*. *This*
recognition is wholly *without* effort since it is *already* true and
*needs* no protection. It is in the perfect safety of God. Therefore
inclusion is total and creation is without limit.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Seven**](#part0004.html#chap-7) {#part0012_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Consistency of the Kingdom**](#part0004.html#chap-7) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-43) {#part0012_split_000.html#h1-43 .level1a1}

^7:1^ The creative power of both God and His creations is limitless, but
they are not in reciprocal relationship. You *do* communicate fully with
God, as He does with you. This is an ongoing process in which you share,
and *because* you share it, you are inspired to create *like* God. Yet
in creation you are not in reciprocal relation to God since He created
*you,* but you did *not* create Him. We have already said that only in
this respect your creative power differs from His. Even in this world
there is a parallel. Parents give birth to children, but children do not
give birth to parents. They *do,* however, give birth to *their*
children and thus give birth *as* their parents do.

^2^ If you created God and He created you, the Kingdom could not
increase through its own creative thought. Creation would therefore be
limited, and you would not be co-creators with God. As God's creative
Thought proceeds from Him to you, so must your creative thought proceed
from you to *your* creations. Only in this way can all creative power
extend outward. God's accomplishments are not yours. But yours are
*like* His. *He* created the Sonship, and you *increase* it. You have
the power to *add* to the Kingdom, but not to add to the *Creator* of
the Kingdom. You claim this power when you become vigilant only for God
and His Kingdom. *By accepting* this power as yours, you have learned to
be what you are.

^3^ Your creations belong in you, as you belong in God. You are part of
God, as your sons are part of His Sons. To create is to love. Love
extends outward simply because it cannot be contained. Being limitless,
*it does not stop.* It creates forever, but not in time. God's creations
have always been because *He* has always been. *Your* creations have
always been because you can create only as God creates. Eternity is
yours because He created you eternal.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Bargaining versus Healing**](#part0004.html#level-44) {#part0012_split_001.html#h1-44 .level1a}

^4^ The ego demands reciprocal rights because it is competitive rather
than loving. It is always willing to make a "deal," but it cannot
understand that to be *like* another means that *no* deals are possible.
To gain you must give, not bargain. To bargain is to limit giving, and
this is not God's Will. To will with God is to create like Him. God does
not limit His gifts in any way. *You* are His gifts, and so your gifts
must be like His. Your gifts *to* the Kingdom must be like His gifts to
*you*.

^5^ I gave *only* love to the Kingdom because I believed that was what I
*was*. What you believe you are *determines* your gifts, and if God
created you by extending Himself *as* you, you can only extend
*yourself* as He did. Only joy increases forever, since joy and eternity
are inseparable. God extends outward beyond limits and beyond time, and
you who are co-creators with Him extend His Kingdom forever and beyond
limit. Eternity is the indelible stamp of creation. The eternal are in
peace and joy forever.

^6^ To think like God is to share His *certainty* of what you are and to
*create* like Him is to share the perfect love He shares with *you*. To
this the Holy Spirit leads you that your joy may be complete because the
Kingdom of God is whole. We have said that the last step in the
reawakening of knowledge is taken by God. This is true, but it is hard
to explain in words because words are symbols, and nothing that is true
*needs* to be explained. However, the Holy Spirit has the task of
translating the use*less* into the use*ful*, the meaning*less* into the
meaning*ful,* and the temporary into the timeless. He *can* therefore
tell you something about this last step, although this one you must know
yourself, since *by* it you know what you are. This *is* your being.

^7^ God does not *take* steps because His accomplishments are not
gradual. He does not teach because His creations are changeless. He does
nothing *last* because He created *first* and *for always*. It must be
understood that the word "first" as applied to Him is *not* a time
concept. He is first in the sense that He is the first in the Holy
Trinity itself. He is the Prime Creator because He created His
co-creators. *Because* He did, time applies neither to Him *nor* to what
He created. The "last step" that God will take was therefore true in the
beginning, is true now, and will be true forever.

^8^ What is timeless is *always* there because its *being* is eternally
changeless. It does not change by increase because it was forever
created *to* increase. If you perceive it as *not* increasing, you do
not know what it *is*. You also do not know what created it or Who *He*
is. God does not *reveal* this to you because it was never hidden. His
light was never obscured because it is His Will to *share* it. How can
what is fully shared be withheld and *then* revealed?

^9^ To heal is the only kind of thinking in this world that resembles
the Thought of God, and because of the elements which they share, can
transfer *to it*. When a brother perceives himself as sick, he is
perceiving himself as *not whole* and therefore *in need.* If you too
see him this way, you are seeing him as if he were absent from the
Kingdom or separated from it, thus making the Kingdom itself obscure to
*both* of you. Sickness and separation are not of God, but the Kingdom
is. If you obscure the Kingdom, you are perceiving what is *not of God*.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Laws of the Mind**](#part0004.html#level-45) {#part0012_split_002.html#h1-45 .level1a}

^10^ To heal, then, is to correct perception in your brother *and*
yourself by sharing the Holy Spirit with him. This places you *both*
within the Kingdom and restores its wholeness in your minds. This
parallels creation because it *unifies by increasing* and *integrates by
extending*. What you project you believe. This is an immutable law of
the mind in this world as well as in the Kingdom. However, the content
is different in this world because the thoughts it governs are very
different from the thoughts in the Kingdom. Laws must be adapted to
circumstances if they are to maintain order.

^11^ The outstanding characteristic of the laws of mind as they operate
in this world is that by obeying them-and I assure you that you *must*
obey them-you can arrive at diametrically opposed results. This is
because the laws have adapted to the circumstances of this world, in
which diametrically opposed outcomes *are* believed in. The laws of mind
govern thoughts, and you *do* respond to two conflicting voices. You
have heard many arguments on behalf of "the freedoms," which would
indeed have been freedom if man had not chosen to *fight* for them. That
is why they perceive "the freedoms" as many instead of as one. Yet the
argument that underlies the defense of freedom is perfectly valid.
Because it is true, it should not be *fought* for, but it *should* be
sided *with*.

^12^ Those who are against freedom believe that its outcome will *hurt*
them, which *cannot* be true. But those who are *for* freedom, even if
they are misguided in how to defend it, are siding with the one thing in
this world which *is* true. Whenever anyone can listen fairly to both
sides of *any* issue, he will make the right decision. This is because
he *has* the answer. Conflict can *seem* to be interpersonal, but it
*must* be intrapersonal first.

^13^ The term "intrapersonal" is an ego term because "personal" implies
"of *one* person" and *not* of others. "Interpersonal" has similar error
in that it refers to something that exists among different or *separate*
people. When we spoke before of the extremely *personal* nature of
revelation, we followed this statement immediately with a description of
the inevitable outcomes of the revelation in terms of *sharing*. A
person conceives of himself as separate largely because he perceives
*of* himself as bounded by a body. *Only* if he perceives himself as a
*mind* can this be overcome. Then he is free to use terms like
"intramental" and "intermental" *without* seeing them as different or
conflicting, because minds *can* be in perfect accord.

^14^ *Outside* the Kingdom, the law which prevails *inside* it is
adapted to "what you project you *believe*." This is its *teaching*
form, since outside the Kingdom teaching is mandatory because *learning*
is essential. This form of the law clearly implies that you will learn
what *you* are from what you have projected onto others and therefore
believe *they* are. *In* the Kingdom there is no teaching *or* learning
because there is no *belief*. There is only *certainty.* God and His
Sons, in the surety of being, *know* that what you project you *are*.
That form of the law is not adapted at all, being the law of creation.
God Himself created the law by creating *by* it. And His Sons, who
create like Him, follow it gladly, knowing that the increase of the
Kingdom depends on it just as their own creation did.

^15^ Laws must be communicated if they are to be helpful. In effect,
they must be *translated* for those who speak a different language.
Nevertheless, a good translator, although he must alter the *form* of
what he translates, *never* changes the meaning. In fact, his whole
purpose is to change the form *so that* the original meaning is
retained. The Holy Spirit is the *translator* of the Laws of God to
those who do *not* understand them. You could not do this yourselves
because conflicted minds *cannot* be faithful to one meaning and will
therefore *change the meaning to preserve the form*.

^16^ The Holy Spirit's purpose in translating is naturally *exactly* the
opposite. He translates only to *preserve* the original meaning in *all*
respects and in *all* languages. Therefore, He opposes differences in
form as meaningful, emphasizing always that *these differences do not
matter*. The meaning of His message is *always* the same, and *only* the
meaning matters. God's Law of Creation in perfect form does not involve
the *use* of truth to convince His Sons *of* truth. The *extension* of
truth, which *is* the Law of the Kingdom, rests only on the knowledge of
what truth *is.* This is your inheritance and requires no learning at
all, but when you *dis*inherited yourselves, you *became* learners.

^17^ No one questions the intimate connection of learning and memory.
Learning is impossible *without* memory, since it cannot be consistent
*unless* it is remembered. That is why the Holy Spirit *is* a lesson in
remembering. We said before that He teaches remembering and forgetting,
but the forgetting aspect is only *to make the remembering consistent*.
You forget in order to *remember better*. You will *not* understand His
translations while you listen to two ways of perceiving them. Therefore,
you must forget or relinquish one to *understand* the other. This is the
only way you *can* learn consistency so that you can finally *be*
consistent.

^18^ What can the perfect consistency of the Kingdom mean to the
confused? It is apparent that confusion *interferes* with meaning and
therefore *prevents the learner from appreciating* it. There is *no*
confusion in the Kingdom because there is only *one* meaning. This
meaning comes from God and *is* God. Because it is also *you,* you share
it and *extend* it as your Creator did. This needs no translation
because it is perfectly understood, but it *does* need extension because
it *means* extension. Communication is perfectly direct and perfectly
united. It is totally without strain because nothing discordant *ever*
enters. That is why it *is* the Kingdom of God. It belongs to Him and is
therefore *like* Him. That is its reality, and nothing *can* assail it.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Unified Curriculum**](#part0004.html#level-46) {#part0012_split_003.html#h1-46 .level1a}

^19^ To heal is to liberate totally. We once said there is no order of
difficulty in miracles because they are *all* maximal expressions of
love. This has no range at all. The non-maximal only *appears* to have a
range. This is because it *seems* to be meaningful to measure it *from*
the maximum and identify its position by *how much* it is *not* there.
Actually, this does not mean anything. It is like negative numbers in
that the concept can be used theoretically, but it has no application
practically. It is true that if you put three apples on the table and
then take them away, the three apples are not there. But it is *not*
true that the table is now *minus* three apples. If there is *nothing*
on the table, it does not matter what *was* there in terms of amount.
The "nothing" is neither greater nor less because of what is absent.

^20^ That is why "all" and "nothing" are dichotomous, *without* a range.
This is perfectly clear in considering psychological tests of maximal
performance. You cannot interpret the results *at all* unless you assume
either *maximal* motivation or *no* motivation at all. Only in these two
conditions can you validly compare responses, and you *must* assume the
former, because if the latter were true, the subject would not do
*anything*. Given *variable* motivation, he will do something, but *you*
cannot understand *what it is*.

^21^ The results of such tests are evaluated relatively *assuming*
maximal motivation, but this is because we are dealing with *abilities*,
where degree of development is meaningful. This does *not* mean that
what the ability is used *for* is necessarily either limited *or*
divided. Yet one thing is certain-abilities are *potentials* for
learning, and you will apply them to what you *want* to learn. Learning
is *effort*, and effort means *will.* We have used the term "abilities"
in the plural because abilities began with the ego, which perceived them
as *potentials for excelling*. This is how the ego *still* perceives
them and uses them.

^22^ The ego does not *want* to teach everyone all it has learned
because that would *defeat* its purpose. Therefore, it does not *really*
learn at all. The Holy Spirit teaches you to use what the ego has made
to teach the *opposite* of what the ego has learned. The *kind* of
learning is as irrelevant as is the particular ability which was applied
*to* the learning. You could not have a better example of the Holy
Spirit's unified purpose than this course. The Holy Spirit has taken
very diversified areas of *your* learning and has applied them to a
*unified* curriculum. The fact that this was *not* the ego's reason for
learning is totally irrelevant.

^23^ *You* made the effort to learn, and the Holy Spirit has a unified
goal for *all* effort. He *adapts* the ego's potentials for excelling to
potentials for *equalizing*. This makes them *useless* for the ego's
purpose but *very* useful for His. If different abilities are applied
long enough to one goal, the abilities *themselves* become unified. This
is because they are channelized in one direction or in one *way*.
Ultimately, then, they all contribute to *one result,* and by so doing,
their similarity rather than their differences is emphasized. You can
*excel* in many *different* ways, but you can *equalize* in *one way
only*. Equality is *not* a variable state, by definition.

^24^ That is why you will be able to perform *all* aspects of your work
with ease when you have learned *this* course. To the ego there appears
to be no connection, because the *ego* is discontinuous. Yet the Holy
Spirit teaches *one* lesson and applies it to *all* individuals in *all*
situations. Being conflict-free, He maximizes *all* efforts and *all*
results. By teaching the power of the Kingdom of God Himself, He teaches
you that *all power is yours*. Its application does not matter. It is
*always* maximal. Your vigilance does not *establish* it as yours, but
it *does* enable you to use it *always* and in *all ways.*

^25^ When I said, "I am with you always," I meant it literally. I am not
absent to *anyone* in *any* situation. *Because* I am always with you,
*you* are the way and the truth and the light. You did not make this
power, any more than I did. It was created to *be* shared and therefore
cannot be meaningfully perceived as belonging to anyone *at the expense*
of another. Such a perception makes it meaningless by eliminating or
overlooking its *real* and *only* meaning.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Recognition of Truth**](#part0004.html#level-47) {#part0012_split_004.html#h1-47 .level1a}

^26^ God's meaning waits in the Kingdom because that is where He placed
it. It does not wait in time. It merely *rests* in the Kingdom because
it *belongs* there, as you do. How can you, who *are* God's meaning,
perceive yourselves as absent *from* it? You can see yourselves as
separated from your meaning only *by experiencing yourself as unreal*.
This is why the ego is insane; it teaches that you are *not* what you
*are.* This is so contradictory that it is clearly impossible. It is
therefore a lesson which you *cannot really learn*, and therefore
*cannot really teach*. Yet you are always teaching. You *must* therefore
be teaching something *else* as well, even though the ego *does not know
what it is*.

^27^ The ego, then, *is* always being undone and *does* suspect your
motives. Your mind *cannot* be unified in allegiance to the ego because
the mind does *not* belong to it. Yet what is "treacherous" to the ego
*is* faithful to peace. The ego's "enemy" is therefore *your* friend. We
said before that the ego's friend is not part of you, since the ego
perceives itself as at war and therefore in need of allies. *You* who
are *not* at war must look for brothers and *recognize* all whom you see
*as* brothers, because *only* equals are at peace.

^28^ Because God's equal Sons have everything, they *cannot* compete.
Yet if they perceive *any* of their brothers as anything other than
their perfect equals, the idea of competition *has* entered their minds.
Do not underestimate your need to be vigilant *against* this idea,
because *all* your conflicts come from it. It is the belief that
conflicting interests are possible, and therefore you have accepted the
impossible as *true*. How is that different from saying that you are
perceiving *yourself* as unreal?

^29^ To be *in* the Kingdom is merely to focus your full attention *on*
it. As long as you believe that you can attend to what is not true, you
are accepting conflict as your *choice*. Is it *really* a choice? It
*seems* to be, but seeming and reality are hardly the same. You who
*are* the Kingdom are not concerned with seeming. Reality is yours
because you *are* reality. This is how having and being are ultimately
reconciled, not in the Kingdom, but *in your minds*. The altar there is
the *only* reality. The altar is perfectly clear in thought because it
is a reflection of *perfect* Thought. It sees only brothers because it
sees *only* in its own light.

^30^ God has lit your minds Himself and keeps your minds lit by His
light because His light is what your minds *are*. This is *totally*
beyond question, and when you questioned it you *were* answered. The
answer merely *undoes* the question by establishing the fact that to
question reality is to question meaninglessly. That is why the Holy
Spirit *never* questions. His sole function is to *undo* the
questionable and thus lead to *certainty*. The certain are perfectly
calm because they are not in doubt. They do not raise questions because
nothing questionable *enters* their minds. This holds them in perfect
serenity because this is what they share, *knowing* what they are.

^31^ As has so often been said, healing is both an art and a science. It
is an art because it depends on inspiration in the sense that we have
already used the term. Inspiration is the opposite of dispiriting and
therefore means to make joyous. The dispirited are depressed because
they believe that they are literally "without the Spirit," which is an
illusion. You do not *put* the Spirit in them by inspiring them because
that would be magic and therefore would not be real healing. You *do*,
however, recognize the Spirit that is *already* there and thereby
*reawaken* it. This is why the healer is part of the resurrection and
the *life.* The Spirit is not asleep in the minds of the sick, but the
part of the mind that can perceive it and be glad *is*.

^32^ Healing is also a science because it obeys the laws of God, Whose
laws are true. *Because* they are true, they are perfectly dependable
and therefore universal in application. The *real* aim of science is
neither prediction nor control but *only* understanding. This is because
it does *not* establish the laws it seeks, *cannot* discover them
through prediction, and has *no* control over them at all. Science is
nothing more than an approach to *what already is*. Like inspiration it
can be misunderstood as magic and *will* be whenever it is undertaken as
*separate* from what already is and perceived as a means for
*establishing* it. To believe this is possible is to believe *you can do
it*. This can *only* be the voice of the ego.

^33^ Truth can only be *recognized* and *need* only be recognized.
Inspiration is of the Spirit and certainty is of God according to His
laws. Both, therefore, come from the same Source, since inspiration
comes from the Voice *for* God and certainty comes from the laws *of*
God. Healing does not come *directly* from God, Who knows His creations
as perfectly whole. Yet healing is still *of* God, because it proceeds
from His Voice and from His laws. It is their result, in a state of mind
which does *not* know Him. The *state* is unknown to Him and therefore
does not exist, but those who sleep *are stupefied*, or better,
*unaware*. *Because* they are unaware, they do *not* know.

^34^ The Holy Spirit must work *through* you to teach you He is *in*
you. This is an intermediary step toward the knowledge that you are in
God because you are part of Him. The miracles which the Holy Spirit
inspires can have no order of difficulty because every part of creation
is of *one* order. This is God's *Will and yours*. The laws of God
*establish* this, and the Holy Spirit reminds you *of* it. When you
heal, you are *remembering* the laws of God and forgetting the laws of
the ego. We said before that forgetting is merely a way of remembering
*better.* It is therefore *not* the opposite of remembering, when it is
properly perceived. Perceived *improperly,* it induces a perception of
*conflict* with something *else,* as all incorrect perception does.
*Properly* perceived, it can be used as a way *out* of conflict, as all
proper perception can.

^35^ *All* abilities, then, should be given over to the Holy Spirit,
*Who knows how to use them properly.* He can use them *only* for healing
because He knows you *only* as whole. *By* healing you learn of
wholeness, and by learning of wholeness you learn to remember God. You
*have* forgotten Him, but the Holy Spirit still knows that your
forgetting must be translated into a way of *remembering* and *not*
perceived as a separate ability which opposes an opposite. That is the
way in which the ego tries to use *all* abilities since its goal is
always to make you believe that *you* are in opposition.

^36^ The ego's goal is as unified as the Holy Spirit's, and it is
because of this that their goals can *never* be reconciled in *any* way
or to *any* extent. The ego *always* seeks to divide and separate. The
Holy Spirit *always* seeks to unify and heal. As you heal you *are*
healed because the Holy Spirit sees no order of healing. Healing is the
way to *undo* the belief in differences, being the *only* way of
perceiving the Sonship without this belief. This perception is therefore
*in* accord with the laws of God, even in a state of mind which is *out*
of accord with His. The strength of right perception is so great that it
brings the mind *into* accord with His because it yields to His pull
which is in all of you.

^37^ To *oppose* the pull or the Will of God is not an ability but a
real *delusion*. The ego believes that it *has* this ability and can
offer it to you as a gift. *You do not want it*. It is *not* a gift. It
is *nothing at all*. God has given you a gift which you both have and
are. When you do not use it, you do not know you *have* it. By *not*
knowing this, you do not know what you are. Healing, then, is a way of
*approaching* knowledge by thinking *in accordance* with the laws of God
and recognizing their *universality*. Without this recognition, you have
made the laws themselves meaningless to you. Yet the *laws* are not
meaningless, since all meaning is contained *by* them and *in* them.

^38^ Seek ye *first* the Kingdom of Heaven because that is where the
laws of God operate truly, and they can operate *only* truly since they
are the laws of Truth. But seek this *only* because you can *find*
nothing else. There *is* nothing else. God is all in all in a very
literal sense. All being is in Him who *is* all Being. *You* are
therefore in Him since *your* being *is* His. Healing is a way of
forgetting the sense of danger the ego has induced in *you* by *not*
recognizing its existence in your brothers. This strengthens the Holy
Spirit in *both* of you, because it is a *refusal* to acknowledge fear.
Love needs only this invitation. It comes freely to *all* the Sonship,
being what the Sonship *is*. By your awakening *to* it, you are merely
forgetting what you are *not*. This enables you to remember what you
*are*.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Healing and the Changelessness of Mind**](#part0004.html#level-48) {#part0012_split_005.html#h1-48 .level1a}

^39^ The body is nothing more than a framework for developing abilities.
It is therefore a means for developing *potentials*, which is quite
apart from what the potential is used *for*. *That* is a *decision*. The
effects of the ego's decision in this matter are so apparent that they
need no elaboration here, but the Holy Spirit's decision to use the body
*only* for communication has such a direct connection with healing that
it *does* need clarification. The unhealed healer *obviously* does not
understand his own vocation.

^40^ *Only* minds communicate. Since the ego *cannot* obliterate the
impulse to communicate because it is also the impulse to create, the ego
can only teach you that the *body* can both communicate *and* create and
therefore does not *need* the mind. The ego thus tries to teach you that
the body can *act* like the mind and is therefore self-sufficient. Yet
we have learned that behavior is *not* the level for either teaching
*or* learning. This must be so, since you *can* act in accordance with
what you do *not* believe. To do this, however, will weaken you as
teachers *and* learners because, as has been repeatedly emphasized, you
teach what you *do* believe. An inconsistent lesson will be poorly
taught *and poorly learned*. If you teach both sickness *and* healing,
you are both a poor teacher *and* a poor learner.

^41^ Healing is the one ability which everyone can develop and *must*
develop if he is to be healed. Healing is the Holy Spirit's form of
communication and the *only* one He knows. He recognizes no other,
because He does not accept the ego's confusion of mind and body. Minds
can communicate, but they *cannot* hurt. The body in the service of the
ego can hurt other *bodies*, but this cannot occur unless the body has
*already* been confused with the mind. This fact, too, can be used
either for healing or for magic, but you must remember that magic is
*always* the belief that healing is *harmful*. This is its totally
insane premise, and so it proceeds accordingly.

^42^ Healing only *strengthens*. Magic *always* tries to weaken. Healing
perceives *nothing* in the healer that everyone else does not *share*
with him. Magic *always* sees something "special" in the healer which he
believes he can offer as a gift to someone who does *not* have it. He
may believe that the gift comes *from* God to Him, but it is quite
evident that he does not understand God if he thinks he has something
that others *lack*. You might well ask, then, why some healing *can*
result from this kind of thinking, and there is a reason for this.

^43^ However misguided the "magical healer" may be, he is *also* trying
to help. He is conflicted and unstable, but *at times* he is offering
something to the Sonship, and the only thing the Sonship can *accept* is
healing. When the so-called "healing" works, then, the impulse to help
and to *be* helped have coincided. This is coincidental because the
healer may *not* be experiencing himself as truly helpful at the time,
but the belief that he *is*, in the mind of another, helps *him*.

^44^ The Holy Spirit does *not* work by chance, and healing that is of
Him *always* works. Unless the healer *always* heals by Him, the results
*will* vary. Yet healing itself *is* consistence since *only*
consistence is conflict-free, and only the conflict-free *are* whole. By
accepting exceptions and acknowledging that he can sometimes heal and
sometimes not, the healer is *obviously* accepting inconsistency. He is
therefore *in* conflict and *teaching* conflict. Can anything of God
*not* be for all and for always?

^45^ Love is incapable of *any* exceptions. Only if there is fear does
the *idea* of exceptions seem to be meaningful. Exceptions are fearful
because they are made *by* fear. The "fearful healer" is a contradiction
in terms and is therefore a concept which *only* a conflicted mind could
possibly perceive as meaningful. Fear does *not* gladden. Healing
*does*. Fear *always* makes exceptions. Healing *never* does. Fear
produces dissociation because it induces *separation*. Healing *always*
produces harmony because it proceeds from integration.

^46^ Healing is predictable because it can be counted on. *Everything*
that is of God can be counted on because everything of God is wholly
*real*. Healing can be counted on *because* it is inspired by His Voice
and is in accord with His laws. Yet if healing *is* consistence, it
cannot be inconsistently understood. Understanding *means* consistence
because God means consistence. Since that is *His* meaning, it is also
*yours*. Your meaning cannot *be* out of accord with His because your
whole meaning, and your *only* meaning, comes *from* His and is *like*
His. God cannot be out of accord with *Himself*, and *you* cannot be out
of accord with Him. You cannot separate your *self* from your Creator,
Who created you by sharing *His* being *with you*.

^47^ The unhealed healer wants gratitude *from* his brothers, but he is
not grateful *to* them. This is because he thinks he is *giving*
something *to* them and is *not* receiving something equally desirable
in return. His *teaching* is limited because he is *learning* so little.
His healing lesson is limited by his own ingratitude, which is a lesson
in *sickness*. Learning is constant and so vital in its power for change
that a Son of God can recognize his power in one instant and change the
world in the next. That is because by changing *his* mind he has changed
the most powerful device that was ever created *for* change.

^48^ This in no way contradicts the changelessness of mind as *God*
created it, but you think that you *have* changed it as long as you
learn through the ego. This *does* place you in a position of needing to
learn a lesson which seems contradictory-you must learn to change your
mind *about* your mind. Only by this can you learn that it *is*
changeless. When you heal that is exactly what you *are* learning. You
are recognizing the changeless mind in your brother by realizing that he
*could* not have changed his mind. That is how you perceive the Holy
Spirit in him. It is *only* the Holy Spirit in him that never changes
His mind. He himself must think he *can*, or he would not perceive
himself as sick. He therefore does not know what his self *is*.

^49^ If *you* see only the changeless in him, you have not really
changed him at all. By changing *your* mind about his *for* him, you
help him *undo* the change his ego thinks it has made in him. As you can
hear two voices, so you can see in two ways. One way shows you an image,
or better, an idol which you may worship out of fear but which you will
never love. The other shows you only truth, which you will love because
you will *understand* it. Understanding is *appreciation* because what
you understand you can *identify* with, and by making it part of *you*,
you have accepted it with love.

^50^ That is how God Himself created *you*-in understanding, in
appreciation, and in love. The ego is totally unable to understand this,
because it does *not* understand what it makes; it does *not* appreciate
it; and it does *not* love it. It incorporates to *take away.* It
literally believes that every time it deprives someone of something,
*it* has increased. We have spoken often of the increase of the Kingdom
by *your* creations, which can only be created as *you* were. The whole
glory and perfect joy that *is* the Kingdom lies in you to give. Do you
not *want* to give it?

^51^ You *cannot* forget the Father because I am with you, and *I*
cannot forget Him. To forget *me* is to forget yourself and Him Who
created you. Our brothers *are* forgetful. That is why they need your
remembrance of me and Him who created me. Through this remembrance, you
can change their minds about *themselves*, as I can change *yours.* Your
minds are so powerful a light that you can look into theirs and
enlighten them, as I can enlighten yours. I do not want to share my
*body* in communion, because that is to share nothing. \[Would I try to
share an illusion with the most holy children of a most holy Father?\]
Yet I do want to share my *mind* with you because we *are* of One Mind
and that *Mind is* ours.

^52^ See *only* this *Mind* everywhere because only this *is* everywhere
and in everything. It *is* everything because it encompasses all things
within *itself*. Blessed are you who perceive only this, because you
perceive only what is true. Come therefore unto me and learn of the
truth in *you*. The Mind we share is shared by all our brothers, and as
we see them truly, they *will* be healed. Let *your* mind shine with
mine upon their minds, and by our gratitude to them make them aware of
the light in *them*.

^53^ This light will shine back upon *you* and on the whole Sonship
because this is your proper gift to God. He will accept it and give it
to the Sonship because it is acceptable to Him and therefore to His
Sons. This is the true communion of the Spirit, Who sees the altar of
God in everyone and, by bringing it to *your* appreciation, calls upon
you to love God *and* His creations. You can appreciate the Sonship
*only* as one. This is part of the Law of Creation and therefore governs
*all* thought.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. From Vigilance to Peace**](#part0004.html#level-49) {#part0012_split_006.html#h1-49 .level1a}

^54^ Although you can *love* the Sonship only as one, you can *perceive*
it as fragmented. It is impossible, however, for you to see something in
*part* of it that you will not attribute to *all* of it. That is why
attack is *never* discrete and why attack must be relinquished
*entirely*. If it is *not* relinquished entirely, it is not relinquished
at all. Fear and love are equally reciprocal. They make or create,
depending on whether the ego or the Holy Spirit begets or inspires them,
but they *will* return to the mind of the thinker, and they *will*
affect his total perception. That includes his perception of God, of His
creations, and of his own. He will not appreciate *any* of them if he
regards them fearfully. He will appreciate *all* of them if he regards
them with love.

^55^ The mind that accepts attack *cannot* love. That is because it
believes that it can *destroy* love and therefore does not understand
what love *is.* If it does not understand what love *is*, it *cannot*
perceive itself as loving. This loses the awareness of being, induces
feelings of unreality, and results in utter confusion. Your own thinking
has done this because of its power, but your own thinking can also save
you *from* this because its power is *not* of your making. Your ability
to *direct* your thinking as you will is *part* of its power. If you do
not believe you can do this, you have *denied* the power of your thought
and thus rendered it powerless in your *belief.*

^56^ The ingeniousness of the ego to preserve itself is enormous, but it
stems from the power of the mind, which the ego *denies*. This means
that the ego *attacks* what is *preserving* it, and this *must* be a
source of extreme anxiety. That is why the ego *never* knows what it is
doing. It is perfectly logical but clearly insane. The ego draws upon
the one source which is totally inimical to its existence *for* its
existence. Fearful of perceiving the *power* of this source, it is
forced to depreciate it. This threatens its *own* existence, a state
which it finds intolerable.

^57^ Remaining logical but still insane, the ego resolves this
completely insane dilemma in a completely insane way. It does not
perceive *its* existence as threatened by projecting the threat onto
*you* and perceiving your *being* as nonexistent. This ensures *its*
continuance if you side with it by guaranteeing that you will not know
your *own* safety. The ego cannot afford to know *anything*. Knowledge
is total, and the ego does not *believe* in totality. This unbelief is
its origin and, while the ego does not love *you*, it *is* faithful to
its own antecedents, begetting as it was begotten.

^58^ Mind *always* reproduces as it was produced. Produced by fear, the
ego reproduces fear. This is its allegiance, and this allegiance makes
it treacherous to love, *because* you are love. Love is your power,
which the ego must deny. It must also deny everything which this power
gives you because it gives you *everything*. No one who has everything
*wants* the ego. Its own maker, then, does not want it. Rejection is
therefore the only decision which the ego could possibly encounter, if
the mind which made it knew *itself*. And if it recognized *any* part of
the Sonship, it *would* know itself.

^59^ The ego therefore opposes *all* appreciation, *all* recognition,
*all* sane perception, and *all* knowledge. It perceives their threat as
total because it senses the fact that *all* commitments the mind makes
*are* total. Forced, therefore, to detach itself from you who *are*
mind, it is willing to attach itself to *anything* else. But there *is*
nothing else. It does not follow that the mind cannot make illusions,
but it *does* follow that if it makes illusions it will believe in them,
because that is *how* it made them.

^60^ The Holy Spirit undoes illusions without attacking them merely
because He cannot perceive them at all. They therefore do not exist for
Him. He resolves the *apparent* conflict which they engender by
perceiving *conflict* as meaningless. We said before that the Holy
Spirit perceives the conflict exactly as it is, and it *is* meaningless.
The Holy Spirit does not want you to *understand* conflict; He wants you
to realize that *because* conflict is meaningless it cannot *be*
understood. We have already said that understanding brings appreciation,
and appreciation brings love. Nothing else *can be* understood because
nothing else is *real*, and therefore nothing else *has* meaning.

^61^ If you will keep in mind what the Holy Spirit offers you, you
cannot be vigilant for anything *but* God and His Kingdom. The only
reason you find this difficult is because you think there *is* something
else. Belief does not require vigilance *unless* it is conflicted. If it
is, there *are* conflicting components within it which have engendered a
state of war, and vigilance therefore has become essential. Vigilance
has no place at all in peace. It is necessary against beliefs which are
*not* true and would never have been called upon by the Holy Spirit if
you had *not* believed the untrue. You cannot deny that, when you
believe something, you have *made* it true for *you*.

^62^ When you believe what God does not *know*, your thought seems to
*contradict* His, and this makes it appear *as if* you are attacking
Him. We have repeatedly emphasized that the ego *does* believe it can
attack God and tries to persuade you that *you* have done this. If the
mind *cannot* attack, the ego proceeds perfectly logically to the
position that you cannot *be* mind. By not seeing you as you *are*, it
can see *itself* as it *wants* to be. Aware of its weakness, the ego
wants your allegiance, but not as you really are. The ego therefore
wants to engage your mind in its *own* delusional system, because
otherwise the light of *your* understanding would dispel it.

^63^ The ego wants no part of truth because the truth is that the *ego*
is not true. *If* truth is total, the untrue *cannot* exist. Commitment
to either must be *total*, since they cannot coexist in your minds
*without* splitting them. If they cannot coexist in peace and if you
*want* peace, you must give up the idea of conflict *entirely* and for
*all time.* \[This requires vigilance *only* as long as *you do not
recognize what is true*.\] While you believe that two totally
contradictory thought systems *share* truth, your need for vigilance is
apparent. Your minds *are* dividing their allegiance between two
kingdoms, and you are totally committed to neither.

^64^ Your identification with the Kingdom is totally beyond question,
except by you when you are thinking insanely. What you are is not
established by your perception and is not influenced *by* it at all. All
perceived problems in identification at any level are *not* problems of
fact. They are problems of *understanding,* since they *mean* that you
believe what you can understand *is* up to you to decide. The ego
believes this totally, being *fully* committed to it. It is not true.
The ego therefore is totally committed to untruth, perceiving in total
contradiction to the Holy Spirit and to the knowledge of God.

^65^ You can be perceived with meaning *only* by the Holy Spirit because
your being *is* the knowledge of God. Any belief that you accept which
is apart from this will obscure God's Voice in you and will therefore
obscure God *to* you. Unless you perceive His creation truly, you cannot
know the Creator, since God and His creation are not separate. The
Oneness of the Creator and the creation is your wholeness, your sanity,
and your limitless power. This limitless power is God's gift to you,
because it is what you *are.* If you dissociate your mind from it, you
are perceiving the most powerful force in the universe as if it were
weak because you do not believe *you* are part of it.

^66^ Perceived *without* your part in it, God's creation *is* perceived
as weak, and those who see themselves as weakened *do* attack. The
attack must be blind, however, because there is nothing *to* attack.
Therefore, they make up images, perceive them as unworthy, and attack
them for their unworthiness. That is all the world of the ego
is-*nothing*. It has no meaning. It does not exist. Do not try to
understand it, because if you do you are believing that it can *be*
understood and is therefore capable of being appreciated and loved. That
would justify it, and it cannot *be* justified. You cannot make the
meaningless meaningful. This can *only* be an insane attempt.

^67^ Allowing insanity to enter your minds means that you have not
judged sanity as *wholly desirable.* If you *want* something else, you
will *make* something else, but because it *is* something else, it will
attack your thought system and divide your allegiance. You cannot create
in this divided state, and you must be vigilant *against* this divided
state, because only peace can *be* extended. Your divided minds are
blocking the extension of the Kingdom, and its extension *is* your joy.
If you do not extend the Kingdom, you are not thinking with your Creator
and creating as He created.

^68^ In this depressing state, the Holy Spirit reminds you gently that
you are sad because you are not fulfilling your function as co-creators
with God and are therefore depriving yourselves of joy. This is not
God's Will but *yours*. If your will is out of accord with God's, you
are willing without meaning. Yet because God's Will is unchangeable, no
*real* conflict of will is possible. This is the Holy Spirit's perfectly
consistent teaching.

^69^ Creation, *not* separation, is your will *because* it is God's, and
nothing that opposes this means anything at all. Being a perfect
accomplishment, the Sonship can only accomplish perfectly, extending the
joy in which it was created and identifying itself with both its Creator
and its creations, *knowing* they are one.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Total Commitment**](#part0004.html#level-50) {#part0012_split_007.html#h1-50 .level1a}

^70^ Whenever you deny a blessing to a brother, *you* will feel
deprived. This is because denial is as total as love. It is as
impossible to deny part of the Sonship as it is to love it in part. Nor
is it possible to love it totally *at times*. You cannot be *totally*
committed *sometimes*. Remember a very early lesson-"Never underestimate
the power of denial." It has no power in itself, but you can give it the
power of *your* mind, whose power is without limit of any kind. If you
use it to deny reality, reality *is* gone for you. *Reality cannot be
partly appreciated*. That is why denying any part of it means you have
lost awareness of *all* of it.

^71^ That is the negative side of the law as it operates in this world.
Yet denial is a defense, and so it is as capable of being used
positively as it is of being used destructively. Used negatively it
*will* be destructive because it will be used for attack, but in the
service of the Holy Spirit, the law requires you to recognize only
*part* of reality to appreciate *all* of it. Mind is too powerful to be
subject to exclusion. You will *never* be able to exclude yourself from
what you project.

^72^ When a brother acts insanely, he is offering you an opportunity to
bless him. His need is *yours*. You *need* the blessing you can offer
him. There is no way for you to have it *except* by giving it. This is
the law of God, and it has *no* exceptions. What you deny you *lack*,
not because it *is* lacking, but because you have denied it in another
and are therefore not aware of it in *you*. Every response you make is
determined by what you *think* you are, and what you *want* to be *is*
what you think you are. Therefore, what you want to be determines every
response you make.

^73^ You do not need God's blessing since that you have forever, but you
*do* need *yours.* The picture you see of yourselves is deprived,
unloving, and very vulnerable. You *cannot* love this. Yet you can very
easily escape from it or, better, leave it behind. You are not *there*,
and that is not *you*. Do not see this picture in anyone, or you have
accepted it *as* you. *All* illusions about the Sonship are dispelled
together, as they were *made* together. Teach no one that he is what
*you* would *not* want to be. Your brother is the mirror in which you
will see the image of yourself as long as perception lasts. And
perception *will* last until the Sonship knows itself as whole.

^74^ You made perception, and it must last as long as you *want* it.
Illusions are investments. They will last as long as you value them.
Values are relative, but they are powerful because they are mental
judgments. The only way to dispel illusions is to withdraw *all*
investment from them, and they will have no life for you because you
have put them *out of your mind*. While you include them *in* it, you
are *giving* life to them, except there is nothing there to receive your
gift.

^75^ The gift of life *is* yours to give because it was given *you.* You
are unaware of your gift *because* you do not give it. You cannot make
nothing live since it cannot *be* enlivened. Therefore, you are not
extending the gift you both have and are, and so you do not know your
being. *All* confusion comes from not extending life, since that is
*not* the Will of your Creator. You can do nothing apart from Him, and
you *do* do nothing apart from Him. Keep His way to remember yourselves
and teach His way, lest you forget yourselves. Give only honor to the
Sons of the living God and count yourselves among them gladly.

^76^ *Only* honor is a fitting gift for those whom God Himself created
worthy of honor and whom He honors. Give them the appreciation which God
accords them always because they are His beloved Sons in whom He is well
pleased. You cannot *be* apart from them because you are not apart from
Him. Rest in His love and protect your rest by loving. But love
*everything* He created of which you are a part, or you cannot learn of
His peace and accept His gift for *yourself* and *as* yourself. You
cannot know your own perfection until you have honored all those who
were created *like* you.

^77^ One Child of God is the *only* teacher sufficiently worthy to teach
another. One Teacher is in all your minds, and He teaches the same
lesson to all. He always teaches you the inestimable worth of *every*
Son of God, teaching it with infinite patience born of the infinite love
for which He speaks. Every attack is a call for His patience, since
*only* His patience can translate attack into blessing. Those who attack
do not *know* they are blessed. They attack because they believe they
are *deprived*. Give therefore of *your* abundance and teach your
brothers *theirs*. Do not share their delusions of scarcity, or you will
perceive *yourself* as lacking.

^78^ Attack could never promote attack unless you perceived it as a
means of depriving you of something you *want*. Yet you cannot *lose*
anything unless *you* did not value it and therefore did not *want* it.
This makes you feel *deprived* of it, and by projecting your own
rejection, you believe that others are taking it *from* you. One *must*
be fearful if he believes that his brother is attacking him to tear the
Kingdom of Heaven from him. This is the ultimate basis for *all* of the
ego's projection.

^79^ Being the part of your mind which does not believe it is
responsible for *itself* and being without allegiance to God, the ego is
incapable of trust. Projecting its insane belief that *you* have been
treacherous to *your* Creator, it believes that your brothers, who are
as incapable of this as *you* are, are out to take God *from* you.
Whenever a brother attacks another, this *is* what he believes.
Projection *always* sees your will in others. If you will to separate
yourself from God, that *is* what you will think others are doing *to*
you.

^80^ You *are* the Will of God. Do not accept anything else *as* your
will, or you are denying what you are. Deny this and you *will* attack,
believing you have *been* attacked. But see the love of God in you, and
you will see it everywhere because it *is* everywhere. See His abundance
in everyone, and you will know that you are in Him *with* them. They are
part of you, as you are part of God. *You* are as lonely without
understanding this as God Himself is lonely when His Sons do not know
Him. The peace of God *is* understanding this. There is only one way
*out* of the world's thinking, just as there was only one way *into* it.
Understand totally by understanding *totality*.

^81^ Perceive *any* part of the ego's thought system as wholly insane,
wholly delusional, and wholly undesirable, and you have correctly
evaluated *all* of it. This correction enables you to perceive *any*
part of creation as wholly real, wholly perfect, and *wholly desirable.*
Wanting this *only*, you will *have* this only, and giving this only you
will *be* only this. The gifts you offer to the ego are *always*
experienced as sacrifices, but the gifts you offer to the Kingdom are
gifts to *you.* They will always be treasured by God because they belong
to His beloved Sons who belong to Him. All power and glory are yours
*because* the Kingdom is His.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Defense of Conflict**](#part0004.html#level-51) {#part0012_split_008.html#h1-51 .level1a}

^82^ We once said that without projection there can be no anger, but it
is also true that without projection there can be no love. Projection is
a fundamental law of the mind and therefore one which *always* operates.
It is the law by which you create and were created. It is the law which
unifies the Kingdom and keeps it in the Mind of God. To the ego, the law
is perceived as a way of getting *rid* of something it does *not* want.
To the Holy Spirit, it is the fundamental law of sharing by which you
*give* what you value in order to keep it in your *own* mind.

^83^ Projection to the Holy Spirit is the law of extension. To the ego,
it is the law of deprivation. It therefore produces abundance or
scarcity, depending on how you choose to apply it. This choice *is* up
to you, but it is *not* up to you to decide whether or not you will
*utilize* projection. Every mind *must* project because that is how it
lives, and every mind *is* life. The ego's use of projection must be
fully understood before its inevitable association between projection
and anger can be finally undone.

^84^ The ego *always* tries to preserve conflict. It is very ingenious
in devising ways which *seem* to diminish conflict because it does *not*
want you to find conflict so intolerable that you will *insist* on
giving it up. Therefore, the ego tries to persuade you that *it* can
free you of conflict, lest you give the *ego* up and free *yourself*.
The ego, using its own warped version of the laws of God, utilizes the
power of the mind *only* to defeat the mind's real purpose. It projects
conflict *from* your mind to *other* minds in an attempt to persuade you
that you have gotten *rid* of it. This has several fallacies which may
not be so apparent.

^85^ Strictly speaking, conflict cannot *be* projected precisely
*because* it cannot be fully shared. Any attempt to keep *part* of it
and get rid of another part does not really mean *anything.* Remember
that a conflicted teacher is a poor teacher *and a poor learner.* His
lessons are confused, and their transfer value is severely limited *by*
his confusion. A second fallacy is the idea that you can get *rid* of
something you do not want by giving it away. *Giving* it is how you
*keep* it. The belief that by giving it *out* you have excluded it from
*within* is a complete distortion of the power of extension.

^86^ That is why those who project from the ego are vigilant for their
*own* safety. They *are* afraid that their projections will return and
hurt them. They *do* believe they have blotted their projections from
their *own* minds, but they also believe their projections are trying to
creep back *into* them. That is because the projections have *not* left
their minds, and this in turn forces them to engage in compulsive
activity in order *not* to recognize this. You *cannot* perpetuate an
illusion about another *without* perpetuating it about yourself. There
is no way out of this because it is *impossible* to fragment the mind.

^87^ To fragment is to break into pieces, and mind *cannot* attack or
*be* attacked. The belief that it *can*, a fallacy which the ego
*always* makes, underlies its whole use of projection. It does not
understand what mind *is* and therefore does not understand what *you*
are. Yet its existence is dependent on your mind because the ego *is*
your belief. The ego is therefore a confusion in identification which
never had a consistent model and never developed consistently. It is the
distorted product of the misapplication of the laws of God by distorted
minds which are misusing their own power.

^88^ *Do not be afraid of the ego*. It *does* depend on your mind and,
as you made it by believing in it, so you can dispel it by withdrawing
belief *from* it. Do not project the responsibility for your belief in
it onto anyone *else*, or you will *preserve* the belief. When you are
willing to accept sole responsibility for the ego's existence
*yourself*, you will have laid aside all anger and all attack because
they *come* from an attempt to project responsibility for your *own*
errors. But having *accepted* the errors as yours, *do not keep them*.
Give them over quickly to the Holy Spirit to be undone completely so
that *all* their effects will vanish from your minds and from the
Sonship *as a whole*.

^89^ The Holy Spirit will teach you to perceive *beyond* belief because
truth *is* beyond belief, and His perception *is* true. The ego can be
completely forgotten at *any* time because it was always a belief that
is totally incredible. No one can *keep* a belief he has judged to be
unbelievable. The more you learn about the ego, the more you realize
that it cannot *be* believed. The incredible cannot be understood
because it *is* unbelievable. The utter meaninglessness of all
perception that comes from the unbelievable must be apparent, but it is
not *recognized* as beyond belief because it was made *by* belief.

^90^ The whole purpose of this course is to teach you that the ego is
unbelievable and will forever *be* unbelievable. You who made the ego by
believing the unbelievable cannot make this judgment alone. By accepting
the Atonement for *yourself,* you are deciding against the belief that
you can *be* alone, thus dispelling the idea of separation and affirming
your true identification with the whole Kingdom as literally *part* of
you. This identification is as beyond doubt as it is beyond belief. Your
wholeness has no limits because being is in infinity.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Extension of the Kingdom**](#part0004.html#level-52) {#part0012_split_009.html#h1-52 .level1a}

^91^ Only *you* can limit your creative power, but God wills to release
it. He no more wills you to deprive yourself of your creations than He
wills to deprive Himself of His. Do not withhold your gifts to the
Sonship, or you withhold yourself from God. Selfishness is of the ego,
but self-fullness is of the Soul because that is how God created it. The
Holy Spirit is the part of the mind that lies between the ego and the
Soul, mediating between them *always* in favor of the Soul. To the ego,
this is partiality, and it therefore responds as if it were the part
that is being sided *against*. To the Soul, this is truth because it
knows its fullness and cannot conceive of any part from which it is
excluded.

^92^ The Soul *knows* that the consciousness of all its brothers is
included in its own, as *it* is included in God. The power of the whole
Sonship *and* of its Creator is therefore the Soul's own fullness,
rendering its creations equally whole and equal in perfection. The ego
cannot prevail against a totality which includes God, and any totality
*must* include God. Everything He created is given all His power because
it is part of Him and shares His Being with Him. Creating is the
opposite of loss, as blessing is the opposite of sacrifice. Being *must*
be extended. That is how it retains the knowledge of *itself.*

^93^ The Soul yearns to share its being as *its* Creator did. Created
*by* sharing, its will is to create. It does not wish to *contain* God
but to *extend* His Being. The extension of God's Being is the Soul's
*only* function. Its fullness cannot be contained any more than can the
fullness of its Creator. Fullness *is* extension. The ego's whole
thought system blocks extension and thus blocks your only function. It
therefore blocks your joy, and that is why you perceive yourselves as
unfulfilled. Unless you create, you *are* unfulfilled; but God does not
know of unfulfillment, and therefore you *must* create. *You* may not
know your own creations, but this can no more interfere with their
reality than your unawareness of your Soul can interfere with its being.

^94^ The Kingdom is forever extending because it is in the Mind of God.
You do not *know* your joy because you do not know your own
self-fullness. Exclude *any* part of the Kingdom from yourself, and you
are *not* whole. A split mind cannot perceive its fullness and needs the
miracle of its wholeness to dawn upon it and heal it. This reawakens the
wholeness in it and restores it to the Kingdom because of its
*acceptance* of wholeness. The full appreciation of its self-fullness
makes selfishness impossible and extension inevitable. That is why there
is perfect peace in the Kingdom. Every Soul *is* fulfilling its
function, and only complete fulfillment *is* peace.

^95^ Insanity *appears* to add to reality, but no one would claim that
what it adds is true. Insanity is therefore the *non*-extension of
truth, which blocks joy because it blocks creation and thus blocks
self-fulfillment. The unfulfilled *must* be depressed because their
self-fullness is unknown to them. Your creations are protected *for* you
because the Holy Spirit, Who is in your mind, knows of them and can
bring them *into* your awareness whenever you will let Him. They are
there as part of your own being because your fulfillment *includes*
them. The creations of every Son of God are yours since every creation
belongs to everyone, being created for the Sonship as a whole.

^96^ You have *not* failed to add to the inheritance of the Sons of God
and thus have not failed to secure it for yourselves. If it was the Will
of God to give it to you, He gave it forever. If it was His Will that
you have it forever, He gave you the means for keeping it, *and you have
done so*. Disobeying God's Will is meaningful only to the insane. In
truth it is impossible. Your self-fullness is as boundless as God's.
Like His, it extends forever and in perfect peace. Its radiance is so
intense that it creates in perfect joy, and only the whole can be born
of its wholeness.

^97^ Be confident that you have never lost your identity and the
extensions which maintain it in wholeness and peace. Miracles are an
*expression* of this confidence. They are reflections both of your own
proper identification with your brothers and of your own awareness that
your identification *is* maintained by extension. The miracle is a
*lesson in total perception*. By including *any* part of totality in the
lesson, you *have* included the whole. You have said that when you write
of the Kingdom and your creations which belong in it, you are describing
*what you do not know.* That is true in a sense, but no more true than
your failure to acknowledge the whole result of the ego's premises. The
Kingdom is the result of premises, just as this world is.

^98^ You *have* carried the ego's reasoning to its logical conclusion,
which is *total confusion about everything*. Yet you do not really
*believe* this, or you could not possibly maintain it. If you really saw
this result, you could not *want* it. The only reason why you could
possibly want *any* part of it is because you do *not* see the whole of
it. You are willing to look at the ego's premises but *not* at their
logical outcome. Is it not possible that you have done the same thing
with the premises of God?

^99^ Your creations *are* the logical outcome of His premises. *His*
thinking has established them *for* you. They are therefore there,
*exactly* where they belong. They belong in your mind as part of your
identification with His, but your state of mind and your recognition of
what is *in* your mind depends at any given moment on what you believe
*about* your mind. Whatever these beliefs may be, they are the premises
which will determine what you accept *into* your mind. It is surely
clear that you can both accept into your mind what is not really there
and deny what *is*. Neither of these possibilities requires further
elaboration here, but both are clearly indefensible, even if you elect
to defend them.

^100^ Yet the function which God Himself gave your minds through His you
may deny, but you cannot prevent. It is the logical outcome of what you
*are*. The ability to see a logical outcome depends on the *willingness*
to see it, but its truth has nothing to do with your willingness at all.
Truth is *God's Will. Share* His Will, and you share what He knows.
*Deny* His Will as yours, and you are denying His Kingdom *and* yours.
The Holy Spirit will direct you only so as to avoid pain. The undoing of
pain must obviously avoid pain. Surely no one would object to this goal
*if he recognized it*. The problem is not whether what the Holy Spirit
says is true, but whether you want to *listen* to what He says.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The Confusion of Strength and Weakness**](#part0004.html#level-53) {#part0012_split_010.html#h1-53 .level1a}

^101^ You no more recognize what is painful than you know what is joyful
and are in fact very apt to confuse the two. The Holy Spirit's main
function is to teach you *to tell them apart*. However strange it may
seem that this is necessary, it obviously *is.* The reason is equally
obvious. What is joyful to you *is* painful to the ego and, as long as
you are in doubt about what *you* are, you will be confused about joy
and pain. This confusion is the cause of the whole idea of sacrifice.
Obey the Holy Spirit, and you *will* be giving up the ego. But you will
be sacrificing *nothing*. On the contrary, you will be gaining
*everything.* If you believed this, there would *be* no conflict.

^102^ That is why you need to *demonstrate* the obvious to yourself. It
is *not* obvious to you. You believe that doing the *opposite* of God's
Will can be better for you. You also believe that it is possible to *do*
the opposite of God's *Will*. Therefore, you believe that an impossible
choice is open to you and one which is both very fearful *and* very
desirable. Yet God *wills.* He does *not* wish. *Your* will is as
powerful as His because it *is* His. The ego's wishes do not mean
anything, because the ego wishes for the impossible. You can *wish* for
the impossible, but you can *will* only with God. This is the ego's
weakness and *your* strength.

^103^ The Holy Spirit *always* sides with you and with your strength. As
long as you avoid His guidance in any way, you *want* to be weak. Yet
weakness *is* frightening. What else, then, can this decision mean
except that you *want* to be fearful? The Holy Spirit *never* asks for
sacrifice, but the ego *always* does. When you are confused about this
*very* clear distinction in motivation, it can *only* be due to
projection. Projection of this kind *is* a confusion in motivation and,
*given* this confusion, trust becomes impossible.

^104^ No one obeys gladly a guide he does not trust, but this does not
mean that the *guide* is untrustworthy. In this case, it *always* means
that the *follower* is. However, this too is merely a matter of his own
belief. Believing that *he* can betray, he believes that everything can
betray *him*. Yet this is only because he has *elected to follow false
guidance*. Unable to follow this guidance *without* fear, he associates
fear *with* guidance and refuses to follow *any* guidance at all. \[If
the result of this decision is confusion, this is hardly surprising.\]
The Holy Spirit is perfectly trustworthy, as *you* are. God Himself
trusts you, and therefore your trustworthiness *is* beyond question. It
will always remain beyond question, however much *you* may question it.

^105^ We said before that you *are* the Will of God. His Will is not an
idle wish, and your identification *with* His Will is not optional,
since it *is* what you are. Sharing His Will with me is not really open
to choice, though it may seem to be. The whole separation lies in this
fallacy. The only way *out* of the fallacy is to decide that you do not
have to decide *anything*. Everything has been given you by *God's*
decision. That *is* His Will, and you can *not* undo it. Even the
relinquishment of your false decision-making prerogative, which the ego
guards so jealously, is not accomplished by your wish. It was
accomplished *for* you by the Will of God, Who has not left you
comfortless. His Voice *will* teach you how to distinguish between pain
and joy and *will* lead you out of the confusion which you have made.
There *is* no confusion in the mind of a Son of God whose will *must* be
the Will of the Father because the Father's Will *is* His Son.

^106^ Miracles are *in accord* with the Will of God Whose Will you do
not know because you are confused about what *you* will. This means that
you are confused about what you are. If you *are* God's Will and do not
*accept* His *Will*, you are denying joy. The miracle is therefore a
lesson in *what joy is.* Being a lesson in sharing, it is a lesson in
love, which *is* joy. Every miracle is thus a lesson in truth, and by
offering truth you are learning the difference between pain and joy.
:::

[]{#part0012_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XII. The State of Grace**](#part0004.html#level-54) {#part0012_split_011.html#h1-54 .level1a}

^107^ The Holy Spirit will *always* guide you truly because *your* joy
is *His*. This is His Will for everyone because He speaks for the
Kingdom of God which *is* joy. Following Him is therefore the easiest
thing in the world and the only thing that *is* easy, because it is not
of the world and is therefore *natural.* The world *goes against* your
nature, being out of accord with God's laws. The world perceives orders
of difficulty in everything. This is because the ego perceives nothing
as wholly desirable. By demonstrating to yourselves that there *is* no
order of difficulty in miracles, you will convince yourselves that in
your *natural* state there is no difficulty because it is a state of
grace.

^108^ Grace is the *natural* state of every Son of God. When he is *not*
in a state of grace, he is out of his natural environment and does not
function well. Everything he does becomes a strain because he was not
created for the environment that he has made. He therefore *cannot*
adapt to it, nor can he adapt *it* to *him*. There is no point in
trying. A Son of God is happy *only* when he knows he is with God. That
is the only environment in which he will not experience strain, because
that is where he belongs. It is also the only environment that is worthy
of him, because his own worth is beyond anything he can make.

^109^ Consider the kingdom *you* have made and judge its worth fairly.
Is it worthy to be a home for a Child of God? Does it protect his peace
and shine love upon him? Does it keep his heart untouched by fear and
allow him to give always without any sense of loss? Does it teach him
that this giving *is* his joy and that God Himself thanks him for his
giving? That is the *only* environment in which you can be happy. You
cannot make it any more than you can make yourselves. It has been
created *for* you, as you were created for it. God watches over His
Children and denies them nothing. Yet when they deny Him, they do not
know this, because they deny *themselves* everything.

^110^ You who could give the love of God to everything you see and touch
and remember are literally denying Heaven to yourselves. I call upon you
again to remember that I have chosen you to teach the Kingdom *to* the
Kingdom. There are no exceptions to this lesson, because the lack of
exceptions *is* the lesson. Every Son who returns to the Kingdom with
this lesson in his heart has healed the Sonship and given thanks to God.
Everyone who learns this lesson has become the perfect teacher because
he has learned it of the Holy Spirit, Who wants to teach him everything
He knows. When a mind *has* only light, it *knows* only light. Its own
radiance shines all around it and extends out into the darkness of other
minds, transforming them into majesty.

^111^ The Majesty of God is there for you to recognize and appreciate
and *know.* Perceiving the Majesty of God *as* your brother is to accept
your *own* inheritance. God gives only equally. If you recognize His
gift in anyone else, you have acknowledged what He has given *you*.
Nothing is so easy to perceive as truth. This is the perception which is
immediate, clear, and natural. You have trained yourselves *not* to see
it, and this has been very difficult for you. *Out* of your natural
environment, you may well ask, "What is truth?" since truth *is* the
environment by which and for which you were created.

^112^ You do not know yourselves, because you do not know *your*
Creator. You do not know your creations, because you do not know your
brothers, who created them *with* you. We said before that only the
whole Sonship is worthy to be co-creator with God because only the whole
Sonship can create *like* Him. Whenever you heal a brother by
recognizing his worth, you are acknowledging *his* power to create *and
yours.* He cannot have lost what *you* recognize, and *you* must have
the glory you see in him. He is a co-creator with God with *you*. Deny
*his* creative power, and you are denying yours *and that of God, Who
created you.* You cannot deny part of truth. You do not know your
creations because you do not know their creator. You do not know
yourselves because you do not know *yours*.

^113^ Your creations cannot establish your reality any more than you can
establish God's. But you can *know* both. Being is known by sharing.
*Because* God shared His Being with you, you can know Him. But you must
also know all He created to know what *they* have shared. Without your
Father, you will not know your fatherhood. The Kingdom of God includes
all His Sons and their children, who are like the Sons as they are like
the Father. Know then the Sons of God, and you will know *all* creation.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Eight**](#part0004.html#chap-8) {#part0013_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Journey Back**](#part0004.html#chap-8) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-55) {#part0013_split_000.html#h1-55 .level1a1}

^8:1^ You are hampered in your progress by your demands to know what you
do *not* know. This is actually a way of holding on to deprivation. You
cannot reasonably object to following instructions in a course *for*
knowing on the grounds that you do *not* know. The need for the course
is implicit in your objection. Knowledge is not the motivation for
learning this course. *Peace* is. As the prerequisite for knowledge,
peace *must* be learned. This is only because those who are in conflict
are *not* peaceful, and peace is the *condition* of knowledge because it
is the condition of the Kingdom.

^2^ Knowledge will be restored when you meet its conditions. This is not
a bargain made by God, Who makes *no* bargains. It is merely the result
of your misuse of His laws on behalf of a will that is not His.
Knowledge *is* His Will. If you are *opposing* His Will, how can you
have knowledge? I have told you what knowledge offers you, but it is
clear that you do not regard this as wholly desirable. If you did, you
would hardly be willing to throw it away so readily when the ego asks
for your allegiance. The distraction of the ego seems to interfere with
your learning, but the ego *has* no power to distract you unless you
*give* it the power.

^3^ The ego's voice is an hallucination. You cannot expect it to say, "I
am not real." Hallucinations *are* inaccurate perceptions of reality.
Yet you are not asked to dispel them alone. You are merely asked to
evaluate them in terms of their results to *you*. If you do not want
them on the basis of loss of peace, they will be removed from your mind
*for* you. Every response to the ego is a call to war, and war *does*
deprive you of peace. Yet in this war there is no opponent. *This* is
the reinterpretation of reality which you must make to secure peace, and
the only one you need *ever* make.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Direction of the Curriculum**](#part0004.html#level-56) {#part0013_split_001.html#h1-56 .level1a}

^4^ Those whom you perceive as opponents are *part* of your peace, which
*you* are giving up by attacking them. How can you *have* what you give
up? You *share* to have, but you do not give it up yourself. When you
give up peace, you are *excluding* yourself from it. This is a condition
which is so alien to the Kingdom that you cannot understand the state
which prevails within it. Your past learning must have taught you the
wrong things simply because it has not made you happy. On this basis
alone, its value should be questioned.

^5^ If learning aims at change, and that is *always* its purpose, are
you satisfied with the changes *your* learning has brought you?
Dissatisfaction with learning outcomes must be a sign of learning
failure, since it means that you did not get what you *want*. The
curriculum of the Atonement is the opposite of the curriculum you have
established for yourselves, *but so is its outcome*. If the outcome of
yours has made you unhappy and if you *want* a different one, a change
in the curriculum is obviously necessary.

^6^ The first change that must be introduced is a change in *direction*.
A meaningful curriculum *cannot* be inconsistent. If it is planned by
two teachers, each believing in diametrically opposed ideas, it cannot
*b*e integrated. If it is carried out by these two teachers
simultaneously, each one merely *interferes* with the other. This leads
to fluctuation, but *not* to change. The volatile *have no* direction.
They cannot choose one because they cannot relinquish the other, even if
the other does not exist. Their conflicted curriculum teaches them *all*
directions exist and gives them no rationale for choice.

^7^ The total senselessness of such a curriculum must be fully
recognized before a real change in direction becomes possible. You
*cannot* learn simultaneously from two teachers who are in *total*
disagreement about everything. Their joint curriculum presents an
impossible learning task. They are teaching you *entirely* different
things in *entirely* different ways, which might be possible except for
the crucial fact that both are *teaching you about yourself*. Your
reality is unaffected by both, but if you *listen* to both your mind
will be split about what your reality *is*.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Rationale For Choice**](#part0004.html#level-57) {#part0013_split_002.html#h1-57 .level1a}

^8^ There *is* a rationale for choice. Only one Teacher *knows* what
your reality is. If learning that is the *purpos*e of the curriculum,
you must learn it of Him. The ego does not *know* what it is trying to
teach. It is trying to teach you what you are *without* knowing it. The
ego is expert only in confusion. It does not understand anything else.
As a teacher, then, it is totally confused and *totally confusing*. Even
if you could disregard the Holy Spirit entirely, which is quite
impossible, you could learn nothing from the ego because the ego *knows*
nothing.

^9^ Is there *any* possible reason for choosing a teacher such as this?
Does the total disregard of anything it teaches make anything *but*
sense? Is *this* the teacher to whom a Son of God should turn to find
*himself*? The ego has never given you a sensible answer to *anything*.
Simply on the grounds of your own experience with the ego's teaching,
should not this alone disqualify it as your future teacher? Yet the ego
has done more harm to your learning than this alone. Learning is joyful
if it leads you along your natural path and facilitates the development
of what you *have*. When you are taught *against* your nature, however,
you will *lose* by your learning because your learning will imprison
you. Your will is *in* your nature and therefore *cannot* go against it.

^10^ The ego cannot teach you anything as long as your will is free
because you will not *listen* to it. It is *not* your will to be
imprisoned *because* your will is free. That is why the ego is the
*denial* of free will. It is *never* God who coerces you because He
*shares* His Will with you. His Voice teaches *only* His Will, but that
is not the Holy Spirit's lesson because that is what you *are*. The
*lesson* is that your will and God's cannot be out of accord *because*
they are one. This is the undoing of *everything* the ego tries to
teach. It is not, then, only the direction of the curriculum which must
be unconflicted, but also the *content*.

^11^ The ego wants to teach you that you want to *oppose* God's Will.
This *unnatural* lesson cannot *be* learned, but the *attempt* to learn
it is a violation of your own freedom and makes you afraid of your will
*because* it is free. The Holy Spirit opposes *any* imprisoning of the
will of a Son of God, *knowing* that the will of the Son *is* the
Father's. The Holy Spirit leads you steadily along the path of freedom,
teaching you how to disregard or look beyond *everything* that would
hold you back.

^12^ We said before that the Holy Spirit teaches you the difference
between pain and joy. That is the same as saying that He teaches you the
difference between imprisonment and freedom. *You* cannot make this
distinction *without* Him. That is because you have taught yourself that
imprisonment *is* freedom. Believing them to be the same, how *can* you
tell them apart? Can you ask the part of your mind that taught you to
believe they *are* the same to teach you the *difference* between them?

^13^ The Holy Spirit's teaching takes only *one* direction and has only
*one* goal. His direction is freedom, and His goal is God. Yet He cannot
conceive of God without *you* because it is not God's Will to *be*
without you. When you have learned that your will *is* God's, you could
no more will to be without Him than He could will to be without *you*.
This *is* freedom and this *is* joy. Deny yourself this and you *are*
denying God His Kingdom because He created you *for* this. When we said,
"All power and glory are yours because the Kingdom is His," this is what
we meant.

^14^ The Will of God is without limit, and all power and glory lie
within it. It is boundless in strength and in love and in peace. It has
no boundaries because its extension is unlimited, and it encompasses all
things because it created all things. By creating all things, it made
them part of itself. *You* are the Will of God because this is how you
were created. Because your Creator creates *only* like Himself, you
*are* like Him. You are part of Him who *is* all power and glory and are
therefore as unlimited as He is.

^15^ To what else *except* all power and glory can the Holy Spirit
appeal to restore God's Kingdom? His appeal, then, is merely to what the
Kingdom *is* and for its own acknowledgment of what it is. When you
acknowledge this you bring the acknowledgment automatically to everyone
because you *have* acknowledged everyone. By *your* recognition you
awaken *theirs*, and through theirs *yours* is extended. Awakening runs
easily and gladly through the Kingdom in answer to the Call of God. This
is the natural response of every Son of God to the Voice of his Creator
because it is the Voice for *his* creations and for *his* own extension.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Holy Encounter**](#part0004.html#level-58) {#part0013_split_003.html#h1-58 .level1a}

^16^ Glory be to God in the highest and to *you* because He has so
willed it. Ask and it shall be given you because it has already *been*
given. Ask for light and learn that you *are* light. If you want
understanding and enlightenment, you *will* learn it because your will
to learn it is your decision to listen to the Teacher who *knows* of
light and can therefore *teach* it to you. There is no limit on your
learning because there is no limit on your *minds*. There is no limit on
His will to teach because He was created *to* teach. *Knowing* His
function perfectly, He wills to fulfill it perfectly because that is His
joy and *yours*.

^17^ To fulfill the Will of God perfectly is the only joy and peace that
can be fully known because it is the only function that can be fully
*experienced*. When this is accomplished, then, there *i*s no other
experience. Yet the *wish* for other experience will block its
accomplishment because God's Will cannot be forced upon you, being an
experience of total *willingness*. The Holy Spirit knows how to teach
this, but *you* do not. That is why you need Him, and why God *gave* Him
to you. Only *His* teaching will release your will to God's, uniting it
with His power and glory and establishing them as *yours*. You share
them as God shares them because this is the natural outcome of their
being.

^18^ The Will of Father and of the Son are one together *by* their
extension. Their extension is the *result* of their oneness, holding
their unity together by extending their *joint* will. This is perfect
creation by the perfectly created in union with Perfect Creator. The
Father *must* give fatherhood to His Son because His own Fatherhood must
be extended outward. You who belong in God have the holy function of
extending His Fatherhood by placing *no* limits upon it. Let the Holy
Spirit teach you *how* to do this, for you will know what it *means* of
God Himself.

^19^ When you meet anyone, remember it is a holy encounter. As you see
him, you will see yourself. As you treat him, you will treat yourself.
As you think of him, you will think of yourself. Never forget this, for
in him you will find yourself or lose sight of yourself. Whenever two
Sons of God meet, they are given another chance at salvation. Do not
leave anyone without giving salvation *to* him and receiving it
yourself, for I am always there with you in remembrance of *you*.

^20^ The goal of the curriculum, regardless of the teacher you choose,
is *know thyself*. There is nothing else to learn. Everyone is looking
for himself and for the power and glory he thinks he has lost. Whenever
you are with anyone, you have another opportunity to find them. Your
power and glory are in him *because* they are yours. The ego tries to
find them in *yourself* because it does not know where to look. The Holy
Spirit teaches you that if you look *only* at yourself, you *cannot*
find yourself because that is not what you *are*.

^21^ Whenever you are with a brother, you are learning what you are
because you are *teaching* what you are. He will respond either with
pain or with joy, depending on which teacher *you* are following. *He*
will be imprisoned or released according to your decision, *and so will
you*. Never forget your responsibility to him because it is your
responsibility to *yourself*. Give him *his* place in the Kingdom, and
you will have *yours*. The Kingdom *cannot* be found alone, and you who
*are* the Kingdom cannot find *yourselves* alone.

^22^ To achieve the goal of the curriculum, then, you *cannot* listen to
the ego. *Its* purpose is to *defeat* its own goal. The ego does not
know this, because it does not know anything. But *you* can know this,
and you *will* know it if you are willing to look at what the ego has
made of *you*. This *is* your responsibility, because once you have
really done this you *will* accept the Atonement for yourself. What
other choice could you make? Having made this choice, you will begin to
learn and understand why you have believed that when you met someone
else, you had thought that he *was* someone else. And every holy
encounter in which *you* enter fully will teach you *this is not so*.

^23^ You can encounter *only* part of yourself because you are part of
God, Who *is* everything. His power and glory are everywhere, and you
*cannot* be excluded from them. The ego teaches that your strength is in
you *alone*. The Holy Spirit teaches that *all* strength is in God and
*therefore* in you. God wills *no one* suffer. He does not will anyone
to suffer for a wrong decision, *including* you. That is why He has
given you the means for *undoing* it. Through His power and glory, all
your wrong decisions are undone, *completely* releasing you *and* your
brothers from *every* imprisoning thought *any* part of the Sonship has
accepted. Wrong decisions have no power *because* they are not true. The
imprisonment which they *seem* to produce is no more true than *they*
are.

^24^ Power and glory belong to God alone. So do *you*. God gives
*whatever* belongs to Him because He gives of Himself, and *everything*
belongs to Him. Giving of *your* self is the function He gave you.
Fulfilling it perfectly will teach you what you *have* of Him, and this
will teach you what you *are* in Him. You *cannot* be powerless to do
this because this *is* your power. Glory is God's gift to you because
that is what *He* is. See this glory everywhere to learn what *you* are.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Light of the World**](#part0004.html#level-59) {#part0013_split_004.html#h1-59 .level1a}

^25^ If God's Will for you is complete peace and joy, unless you
experience *only* this you must be refusing to *acknowledge* His Will.
His Will does not vacillate, being changeless forever. When you are not
at peace, it can only be because you do not believe you *are* in Him.
Yet He is all in all. His peace is complete, and you *must* be included
in it. His laws govern you, because they govern *everything*. You cannot
exempt yourself from His laws, although you can disobey them. Yet if you
do, and *only* if you do, you *will* feel lonely and helpless, because
you are denying yourself everything.

^26^ I am come as a light into a world that *does* deny itself
everything. It does this simply by dissociating itself *from*
everything. It is therefore an illusion of isolation, maintained by fear
of the same loneliness which *is* its illusion. I have told you that I
am with you always, even to the end of the world. That is *why* I am the
light of the world. If I am with you in the loneliness of the world,
*the loneliness is gone*. You *cannot* maintain the illusion of
loneliness if you are *not* alone. My purpose, then, *is* to overcome
the world. I do not attack it, but my light must dispel it because of
what it *is*.

^27^ Light does not attack darkness, but it *does* shine it away. If my
light goes with you everywhere, *you* shine it away *with* me. The light
becomes *ours*, and you cannot abide in darkness any more than darkness
can abide wherever you go. The remembrance of me *is* the remembrance of
yourself and of Him Who sent me to you. You were in darkness until God's
Will was done completely by *any* part of the Sonship. When this was
done, it was perfectly accomplished by *all*. How else could it *be*
perfectly accomplished? My mission was simply to unite the will of the
Sonship with the Will of the Father by being aware of the Father's Will
myself. This is the awareness I came to give *you*, and your problem in
accepting it *is* the problem of this world. Dispelling it is salvation,
and in this sense I *am* the salvation of the world.

^28^ The world must despise and reject me, because the world *is* the
belief that love is impossible. *Your* reactions to me are the reactions
of the world to God. If you will accept the fact that I am with you, you
are *denying* the world and *accepting* God. My will is His, and *your*
will to hear me is the decision to hear His Voice and abide in His Will.
As God sent me to you, so will I send you to others, and I will go to
them *with* you so we can teach them peace and union.

^29^ Do you not think the world *needs* peace as much as you do? Do you
not want to *give* it to the world as much as you want to *receive* it?
For unless you do, you will *no*t receive it. If you will to have it of
me, you *must* give it. Rehabilitation does not come from anyone else.
You can have guidance from without, but you must *accept* it from
within. The guidance must be what *you* want, or it will be meaningless
to you. That is why rehabilitation is a collaborative venture.

^30^ I can tell you what to do, but this will not help you unless you
collaborate by believing that I *know* what to do. Only then will your
mind choose to follow me. Without *your* will, you cannot *be*
rehabilitated. *Motivation* to be healed is the crucial factor in
rehabilitation. Without this you are deciding *against* healing, and
your veto of my will for you *makes healing impossible*. If healing *is*
our joint will, unless our wills *are* joined you *cannot* be healed.
This is obvious when you consider what healing is *for*. Healing is the
way in which the separation is overcome. Separation is overcome by
*union*. It cannot be overcome by separating.

^31^ The *will* to unite must be unequivocal, or the will *itself* is
divided or not whole. Your will is the means by which you determine your
own condition, because will is the *mechanism* of decision. It is the
power by which you separate or join and experience pain or joy
accordingly. My will cannot *overcome* yours, because yours is as
powerful as mine. If it were not so, the Sons of God would be unequal.
All things are possible through our *joint* will, but my will alone
cannot help you. Your will is as free as mine, and God Himself would not
go against it. *I* cannot will what God does *no*t will. I can offer you
my will to make *yours* invincible by this sharing, but I cannot
*oppose* yours *without* competing with it and thereby violating God's
Will for you.

^32^ Nothing God created can oppose your will, as nothing God created
can oppose His. God *gave* your will its power, which I can only
acknowledge in honor of *His*. If you want to be like me, I will help
you, knowing that we *are* alike. If you want to be different, I will
wait until you change your mind. I can *teach* you, but only you can
choose to *listen* to my teaching. How else can it be, if God's Kingdom
*is* freedom? Freedom cannot be learned by tyranny of any kind, and the
perfect equality of *all* God's Sons cannot be recognized through the
dominion of one will over another. God's Sons are equal in will, all
being the Will of their Father. This is the *only* lesson I came to
teach, knowing that it is true.

^33^ When your will is *not* mine, it is not our Father's. This means
that you have imprisoned *yours* and have not *let* it be free. Of
yourselves you can do nothing, because of yourselves you *are* nothing.
I am nothing without the Father, and *you* are nothing without *me*,
because by denying the Father you deny *yourself*. I will *always*
remember you, and in *my* remembrance of you lies your remembrance of
*yourself*. In our remembrance of *each* other lies our remembrance of
God, and in this remembrance lies your freedom because your freedom *is*
in Him. Join then with me in praise of Him *and* you whom He created.
This is our gift of gratitude to Him, which He will share with *all* His
creations to whom He gives equally whatever is acceptable to Him.
*Because* it is acceptable to Him, it is the gift of freedom, which *is*
His Will for all His Sons. By *offering* freedom, *you* will be free.

^34^ Freedom is the only gift you can offer to God's Sons, being an
*acknowledgment* of what *they* are and what *He* is. Freedom is
creation because it is love. What you seek to imprison you do *not*
love. Therefore, when you seek to imprison anyone, including *yourself,*
you do *not* love him, and you cannot identify *with* him. When you
imprison *yourself*, you are losing sight of your true identification
*with* me and with the Father. Your identification *is* with the Father
and with the Son. It *cannot* be with one and not the other. If you are
part of one, you must be part of the other because they *are* one.

^35^ The Holy Trinity is holy *because* it is one. If you exclude
*yourself* from this union, you are perceiving the Holy Trinity as
separated. You must be included *in* It because It *is* everything.
Unless you take your place in It and fulfill your function as *part* of
It, It is as bereft as *you* are. No part of It can be imprisoned if Its
truth is to be known. Can you be separated from your identification and
be at peace? Dissociation is not a solution; it is a *delusion*. The
delusional believe that truth will assail them, and so they do not *see*
it because they *prefer* the delusion. Judging truth as something they
do *not* want, they perceive deception and block knowledge.

^36^ Help them by offering them *your* unified will on their behalf, as
I am offering you mine on *yours*. Alone we can do nothing, but
*together* our wills fuse into something whose power is far beyond the
power of its separate parts. By *not being separate*, the Will of God is
established *in* ours and *as* ours. This Will is invincible *because*
it is undivided. The undivided will of the Sonship is the perfect
creator, being wholly in the likeness of God, Whose Will it *is*. *You*
cannot be exempt from it if you are to understand what *it* is and what
*you* are. By separating your will *from* mine, you are exempting
yourself from the Will of God, which *is* yourself.

^37^ Yet to heal is still to make whole. Therefore, to heal is to
*unite* with those who are like you, because perceiving this likeness
*is* to recognize the Father. If *your* perfection is in Him and *only*
in Him, how can you *know* it without recognizing Him? The recognition
of God *is* the recognition of yourself. There *is* no separation of God
and His creation. You will learn this as you learn that there is no
separation of *your* will and *mine*. Let the love of God shine upon you
by your acceptance of me. *My* reality is yours *and* His. By joining
your will with mine, you are signifying your awareness that the Will of
God is one.

^38^ God's Oneness and ours are not separate, because His Oneness
*encompasses* ours. To join with me is to restore His power to you,
*because* we are sharing it. I offer you only the *recognition* of His
power in you, but in that lies *all* truth. As *we* unite, we unite with
Him. Glory be to the union of God and His holy Sons! All glory lies in
them *because* they are united. The miracles we do bear witness to the
Will of the Father for His Son and to our joy in uniting *with* His Will
for us.

^39^ When you unite with me, you are uniting *without* the ego, because
I have renounced the ego in myself and therefore *cannot* unite with
yours. *Our* union is therefore the way to renounce the ego in
*yourself*. The truth in both of us is *beyond* the ego. By willing
that, you *have* gone beyond it toward truth. Our success in
transcending the ego is guaranteed by God, and I can share \[my perfect
confidence in His promise because I know He gave me\] this confidence
for both of us and *all* of us. I bring God's peace back to all His
Children because I received it of Him for us all. Nothing can prevail
against our united wills because nothing can prevail against God's.
Would you know the Will of God for *you*? Ask it of me who knows it
*for* you, and you will find it. I will deny you nothing, as God denies
*me* nothing.

^40^ Ours is simply the journey back to God, Who is our home. Whenever
fear intrudes anywhere along the road to peace, it is *always* because
the ego has attempted to join the journey with us *and cannot do so*.
Sensing defeat and angered by it, the ego regards itself as rejected and
becomes retaliative. You are invulnerable to its retaliation *because* I
am with you. On this journey, you have chosen me as your companion
*instead* of the ego. Do not try to hold on to both, or you will try to
go in different directions and will lose the way.

^41^ The ego's way is not mine, but it is also *not* yours. The Holy
Spirit has *one* direction for *all* minds, and the one He taught me is
*yours*. Let us not lose sight of His direction through illusions, for
only illusions of another direction can obscure the one for which God's
Voice speaks in all of us. Never accord the ego the power to interfere
with the journey because it *has* none, since the journey is the way to
what is true. Leave *all* deception behind and reach beyond all attempts
of the ego to hold you back. I go before you because I *am* beyond the
ego. Reach therefore for my hand because you *want* to transcend the
ego. My will will *never* be wanting, and if you *want* to share it you
*will*. I give it willingly and gladly because I need you as much as you
need me.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Power of Joint Decision**](#part0004.html#level-60) {#part0013_split_005.html#h1-60 .level1a}

^42^ *We* are the joint will of the Sonship, whose wholeness is for all.
We begin the journey back by setting out *together* and gather in our
brothers as we *continue* together. Every gain in our strength is
offered for all, so they too can lay aside their weakness and add their
strength to us. God's welcome waits for us all, and He will welcome us
as I am welcoming you. Forget not the Kingdom of God for anything the
world has to offer. The world can add nothing to the power and the glory
of God and His holy Sons, but it *can* blind the Sons to the Father if
they behold it. You cannot behold the world and know God. Only one is
true.

^43^ I am come to tell you that the choice of which is true is not
yours. If it were, you would have destroyed yourselves. Yet God did not
will the destruction of His creations, having created them for eternity.
His Will has saved you, not from yourselves, but from your *illusions*
of yourselves. He has saved you *for* yourselves. Let us glorify Him
whom the world denies, for over His Kingdom, it has no power. No one
created by God can find joy in anything *except* the eternal. That is
not because he is deprived of anything else, but because nothing else is
*worthy* of him. What God and His Sons create *is* eternal, and in this
and this only is their joy.

^44^ Listen to the story of the prodigal son, and learn what God's
treasure is and *yours*: This son of a loving father left his home and
thought he squandered everything for nothing of any value, although he
did not know its worthlessness at the time. He was ashamed to return to
his father because he thought he had hurt him. Yet when he came home,
the father welcomed him with joy because only the son himself *was* his
father's treasure. He *wanted* nothing else.

^45^ God wants only His Son because His Son is His only treasure. You
want *your* creations as He wants *His*. Your creations are your gift to
the Holy Trinity, created in gratitude for *your* creation. They do not
leave you, any more than you have left *your* Creator, but they *extend*
your creation as God extended Himself to *you*. Can the creations of God
Himself take joy in what is not real? And what *is* real except the
creations of God and those which are created like His? *Your* creations
love you as your Soul loves your Father for the gift of creation. There
*is* no other gift which is eternal, and therefore there is no other
gift which is *true.*

^46^ How, then, can you *accept* anything else or *give* anything else
and expect joy in return? And what else but joy would you *want*? You
made neither yourself nor your function. You made only the *decision* to
be unworthy of both. Yet you could not make *yourself* unworthy because
you are the treasure of God. What *He* values *is* valuable. There can
*be* no question of its worth because its value lies in God's sharing
Himself with it and *establishing* its value forever.

^47^ *Your* function is to add to God's treasure by creating *yours*.
His Will *to* you is His Will *for* you. He would not withhold creation
from you because *His* joy is in it. You cannot find joy *except* as God
does. *His* joy lay in creating *you*, and He extends His Fatherhood to
you so that you can extend yourself as He did. You do not understand
this because you do not understand *Him*. No one who does not know his
function can understand it, and no one *can* know his function unless he
knows who he *is*. Creation is the Will of God. His Will created you to
create. Your will was not created separate from His, and so it wills as
*He* wills.

^48^ An "unwilling will" does not mean anything, being a contradiction
in terms which actually leaves nothing. When you *think* you are
unwilling to will with God, *you are not thinking*. God's Will *is*
thought. It cannot be contradicted *by* thought. God does not contradict
*Himself*, and His Sons, who are like Him, cannot contradict themselves
*or* Him. Yet their thought is so powerful that they can even imprison
the minds of God's Sons *if* they so choose. This choice *does* make the
Son's function unknown to *him*, but *never* to his Creator. And
*because* it is not unknown to his Creator, it is forever knowable to
him.

^49^ There is no question but one you should ever ask of yourself- "Do I
*want* to know my Father's Will for me?" *He* will not hide it. He has
revealed it to me because I asked it of Him and learned of what He had
already given. Our function is to function together because *apart* from
each other we cannot function at all. The whole power of God's Son lies
in all of us, but not in any of us alone. God would not have us be alone
because *He* does not will to be alone. That is why He created His Son
and gave him the power to create with Him.

^50^ Our creations are as holy as we are, and we are the Sons of God
Himself and therefore as holy as He is. Through our creations, we extend
our love and thus increase the joy of the Holy Trinity. You do not
understand this for a very simple reason. You who are God's own treasure
do not regard yourselves as valuable. Given this belief, you cannot
understand *anything*. I share with God the knowledge of the value *He*
puts upon you. My devotion to you is of Him, being born of my knowledge
of myself *and* Him. We cannot *be* separated. Whom God has joined
cannot be separated, and God has joined all His Sons with Himself. Can
you be separated from your life and your being?

^51^ The journey to God is merely the reawakening of the knowledge of
*where* you are always and *what* you are forever. It is a journey
without distance to a goal that has never changed. Truth can only be
*experienced*. It cannot be described, and it cannot be explained. I can
make you aware of the *conditions* of truth, but the experience is of
God. Together we can meet its conditions, but truth will dawn upon you
of itself.

^52^ What God has willed for you *is* yours. He has given His Will to
His treasure, whose treasure it is. Your heart lies where your treasure
is, as His does. You who are beloved of God are wholly blessed. Learn
this of me, and free the holy will of all those who are as blessed as
*you* are.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Communication and the Ego-Body Equation**](#part0004.html#level-61) {#part0013_split_006.html#h1-61 .level1a}

^53^ Attack is *always* physical. When attack in any form enters your
mind, you are *equating* yourself with a body. This is the ego's
*interpretation* of the body. You do not have to attack physically to
accept this interpretation. You are accepting it simply by the belief
that attack can *get* you something you want. If you did not believe
this, the idea of attack would have no appeal for you. When you equate
yourself with a body, you will *always* experience depression. When a
Child of God thinks of himself in this way, he is belittling himself and
seeing his brothers as similarly belittled. Since he can find himself
*only* in them, he has cut himself off from salvation.

^54^ Remember that the Holy Spirit interprets the body only as a means
of communication. Being the communication link between God and His
separated Sons, the Holy Spirit interprets everything *you* have made in
the light of what *He* is. The ego *separates* through the body. The
Holy Spirit *reaches through* it to others. You do not perceive your
brothers as the Holy Spirit does because you do not interpret their
bodies and yours solely as a means of joining their *minds* and uniting
them with yours and mine. This interpretation of the body will change
your mind entirely about its value. Of itself it has *none*.

^55^ If you use the body for attack, it *is* harmful to you. If you use
it only to reach the minds of those who believe they are bodies and
teach them *through* the body that this is not so, you will begin to
understand the power of the mind that is in both of you. If you use the
body for this and *only* for this, you *canno*t use it for attack. In
the service of uniting, it becomes a beautiful lesson in communion,
which has value until communion *is*. This is God's way of making
unlimited what you have limited. The Holy Spirit does not see the body
as you do because He knows the *only* reality anything can have is the
service it can render God on behalf of the function He has given it.

^56^ Communication *ends* separation. Attack *promotes* it. The body is
beautiful or ugly, holy or savage, helpful or harmful, according to the
use to which it is put. And in the body of another you will see the use
to which you have put yours. If the body becomes for you a means which
you give to the Holy Spirit to use on behalf of union of the Sonship,
you will not see anything physical except as what it is. Use it for
truth, and you will see it truly. *Misuse* it, and you *will*
misunderstand it because you have already done so *by* misusing it.
Interpret *anything* apart from the Holy Spirit, and you will mistrust
it. This will lead you to hatred and attack *and loss of peace*.

^57^ Yet all loss comes only from your own misunderstanding. Loss of
*any* kind is impossible. When you look upon a brother as a physical
entity, *his* power and glory are lost *to* you, and so are *yours*. You
*have* attacked him, but you *must* have attacked yourself first. Do not
see him this way for your *own* salvation, which must bring him *his*.
Do not allow him to belittle himself in *your* mind, but give him
freedom from his belief in littleness and thus escape from *yours*. As
part of you, *he* is holy. As part of me, *you* are. To communicate with
part of God Himself is to reach beyond the Kingdom to its Creator
through His Voice, which He has established as part of *you*.

^58^ Rejoice, then, that of yourselves you can do nothing. You are not
*of* yourselves. He of Whom you *are* has willed your power and glory
*for* you, with which you can perfectly accomplish His holy Will for you
when you so will it yourself. He has not withdrawn His gifts from you,
but *you* have withdrawn them from Him. Let no Son of God remain hidden
for His name's sake because His name is *yours*.

^59^ Remember that the Bible says, "The Word (or thought) was made
flesh." Strictly speaking this is impossible, since it seems to involve
the translation of one order of reality into another. Different orders
of reality merely *appear* to exist, just as different orders of
miracles do. Thought cannot be made into flesh except by belief, since
thought is *not* physical. Yet thought *is* communication, for which the
body *can* be used. This is the only *natural* use to which it *can* be
put. To use the body unnaturally is to lose sight of the Holy Spirit's
purpose and thus to confuse the goal of His curriculum.

^60^ There is nothing so frustrating to a learner as to be placed in a
curriculum which he cannot learn. His sense of adequacy suffers, and he
*must* become depressed. Being faced with an impossible learning
situation, regardless of why it is impossible, is the most depressing
thing in the world. In fact, it is ultimately *why* the world is
depressing. The Holy Spirit's curriculum is *never* depressing because
it is a curriculum of joy. Whenever the reaction to learning is
depression, it is only because the goal of the curriculum has been lost
sight of.

^61^ In the world, not even the body is perceived as whole. Its purpose
is seen as fragmented into many functions which bear little or no
relationship to each other, so that it appears to be ruled by chaos.
Guided by the ego, it *is*. Guided by the Holy Spirit, it is *not*. It
becomes only a means by which the part of the mind you have separated
from your Soul can reach beyond its distortions and *return* to the
Soul. The ego's temple thus becomes the temple of the Holy Spirit, where
devotion to Him replaces devotion to the ego. In this sense, the body
*does* become a temple to God because His Voice abides in it by
directing the use to which it is put.

^62^ Healing is the result of using the body *solely* for communication.
Since this is natural, it heals by making whole, which is *also*
natural. All mind is whole, and the belief that part of it is physical,
or *not* mind, is a fragmented (or sick) interpretation. Mind *cannot*
be made physical, but it *can* be made manifest through the physical if
it uses the body to go *beyond* itself. By reaching *out*, the mind
extends itself. It does not *stop* at the body, for if it does, it is
blocked in its purpose. A mind which has been blocked has allowed itself
to be vulnerable to attack because it has *turned against itself*.

^63^ The removal of the blocks, then, is the *only* way to guarantee
help and healing. Help and healing are the normal expressions of a mind
which is working *through* the body but not *in* it. If the mind
believes the body is its *goal*, it *will* distort its perception of the
body and, by blocking its own extension beyond it, will induce illness
by fostering *separation*. Perceiving the body as a *separate* entity
cannot *but* foster illness because it is not true. A medium of
communication will *lose* its usefulness if it is used for anything
else. To use a medium of communication as a medium of *attack* is an
obvious confusion in purpose.

^64^ To communicate is to join and to attack is to separate. How can you
do both simultaneously with the *same thing* and *not* suffer?
Perception of the body can be unified only by *one* purpose. This
releases the mind from the temptation to see the body in many lights and
gives it over *entirely* to the One Light in Which it can be really
understood at all. To confuse a learning device with a curriculum *goal*
is a fundamental confusion. Learning can hardly be arrested at its own
aids with hope of understanding either the aids *or* the learning's real
purpose. Learning must lead *beyond* the body to the reestablishment of
the power of the mind in it. This can be accomplished *only* if the mind
extends to other minds and does not *arrest* itself in its extension.

^65^ The arrest of the mind's extension is the cause of *all* illness
because only extension is the mind's function. The opposite of joy is
depression. When your learning promotes depression instead of joy, you
cannot be listening to God's joyous Teacher, and you must be learning
amiss. To see a body as anything except a means of pure extension is to
limit your mind and *hurt yourself*. Health is therefore nothing more
than united purpose. If the body is brought under the purpose of the
mind, the body becomes whole because the *mind's* purpose *is* one.
Attack can only be an *assumed* purpose of the body because *apart* from
the mind the body *has no purpose at all*.

^66^ You are *not* limited by the body, and thought *cannot* be made
flesh. Yet mind can be manifested through the body if it goes beyond it
and *does not interpret it as limitation*. Whenever you see another as
limited *to* or *by* the body, you are imposing this limit *on
yourself*. Are you willing to *accept* this, when your whole purpose for
learning should be to *escape* from limitations? To conceive of the body
as a means of attack of any kind and to entertain even the possibility
that joy could *possibly* result is a clear-cut indication of a poor
learner. He has accepted a learning goal in obvious contradiction to the
unified purpose of the curriculum and is interfering with his ability to
accept its purpose as his *own*.

^67^ Joy is unified purpose, and unified purpose is *only* God's. When
yours is unified, it *is* His. Interfere with His purpose, and you
*need* salvation. You have condemned yourself, but condemnation is *not*
of God. Therefore, it is not true. No more are any of the *results* of
your condemnation. When you see a brother as a body, you are condemning
him *because* you have condemned yourself. Yet if all condemnation is
unreal, and it *must* be unreal since it is a form of attack, then it
can *have* no results.

^68^ Do not allow yourselves to suffer from the results of what is not
true. Free your minds from the belief that this is *possible*. In its
complete impossibility and your full awareness *of* its complete
impossibility lie your only hope for release. But what other hope would
you want? Freedom from illusions lies only in not *believing* them.
There *is* no attack, but there *is* unlimited communication and
therefore unlimited power and wholeness. The power of wholeness is
extension. Do not arrest your thought in this world, and you will open
your mind to creation in God.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Body as Means or End**](#part0004.html#level-62) {#part0013_split_007.html#h1-62 .level1a}

^69^ Attitudes toward the body are attitudes toward *attack*. The ego's
definitions of *everything* are childish and always based on what it
believes a thing is *for*. This is because it is incapable of true
generalizations and equates what it sees with the function *it* ascribes
to it. It does *not* equate it with what it *is*. To the ego, the body
is to *attack* with. Equating *you* with the body, it teaches that *you*
are to attack with, because this is what it believes. The body, then, is
not the source of its own health. The body's condition lies solely in
your interpretation of its function.

^70^ The reason why definitions in terms of function are inferior is
that they may well be inaccurate. Functions are part of being since they
arise from it, but the relationship is not reciprocal. The whole *does*
define the part, but the part does *not* define the whole. This is as
true of knowledge as it is of perception. The reason to *know* in part
is to know *entirely* is because of the fundamental *difference* between
knowledge and perception. In perception the whole is built up of parts,
which *can* separate and reassemble in different constellations.
Knowledge never changes, so *its* constellation is permanent. The only
areas in which part-whole relationships have *any* meaning are those in
which change is possible. There *is* no difference between the whole and
the part where change is impossible.

^71^ The body exists in a world which *seems* to contain two voices
which are fighting for its possession. In this perceived constellation,
the body is regarded as capable of shifting its control from one to the
other, making the concept of both health *and* sickness possible. The
ego makes a fundamental confusion between means and ends, as it always
does. Regarding the body as an end, the ego has no *real* use for it
because it is *not* an end. You must have noticed an outstanding
characteristic of every end that the ego has accepted as its own. When
you have achieved it, *it has not satisfied you*. This is why the ego is
forced to shift from one end to another without ceasing, so that *you*
will continue to hope that it can yet offer you something.

^72^ It has been particularly difficult to overcome the ego's belief in
the body as an end, because this is synonymous with the belief in
*attack* as an end. The ego has a real *investment* in sickness. If you
are sick, how can you *object* to the ego's firm belief that you are
*not* invulnerable? This is a particularly appealing argument from the
ego's point of view because it obscures the obvious *attack* which
underlies the sickness. If you accepted *this* and also decided
*against* attack, you could not give this false witness to the ego's
stand.

^73^ It is hard to perceive sickness *as* a false witness because you do
not realize that it *is* entirely out of keeping with what you want.
This witness, then, *appears* to be innocent and trustworthy because you
have not seriously cross-examined him. If you did, you would not
consider sickness such a strong witness on behalf of the ego's views.

^74^ A more honest statement would be as follows: Those who *want* the
ego are predisposed to defend it. Therefore, their choice of witnesses
should be suspect from the beginning. The ego does not call upon
witnesses who would disagree with its case, *nor does the Holy Spirit*.
We have said that judgment *is* the function of the Holy Spirit and one
which He is perfectly equipped to fulfill. The ego as a judge gives
anything *but* an impartial judgment. When the ego calls on a witness,
it has *already* made the witness an ally.

^75^ It is still true that the body has no function of itself, because
it is *not* an end. The ego, however, establishes it *as* an end because
as such it will lose its *true* function. This is the purpose of
*everything* the ego does. Its sole aim is to lose sight of the function
of everything. A sick body does not make any *sense*. It *could* not
make sense, because sickness is not what the body is *for*. Sickness is
meaningful only if the two basic premises on which the ego's
interpretation of the body rests are true. Specifically, these are that
the body is for attack and that you *are* a body. Without these
premises, sickness is completely inconceivable.

^76^ Sickness is a way of demonstrating that *you can be hurt*. It is a
witness to your frailty, your vulnerability, and your extreme need to
depend on *external* guidance. The ego uses this as its best argument
for your need for *its* guidance. It dictates endless prescriptions for
*avoiding* catastrophic outcomes. The Holy Spirit, perfectly aware of
the same data, does not bother to analyze them at all. If the data are
meaningless, there is no point in considering them. The function of
truth is to collect data which are *true*. There is no point in trying
to make sense out of meaningless data. *Any* way you handle them results
in nothing. The more complicated the results become, the harder it may
be to recognize their nothingness, but it is not necessary to examine
*all* possible outcomes to which premises give rise to judge them truly.

^77^ A learning device is *not* a teacher. *It* cannot tell you how
*you* feel. *You* do not know how you feel because you have *accepted*
the ego's confusion, and *you* think that a learning device *can* tell
you how you feel. Sickness is merely another example of your insistence
on asking the guidance of a teacher *who does not know the answer*. The
ego is *incapable* of knowing how you feel. When we said that the ego
does not know *anything*, we said the one thing about the ego that *is*
wholly true. But there *is* a corollary; if knowledge is being and the
ego has no knowledge, then the ego has no *being*.

^78^ You might well ask how the voice of something which does not exist
can be so insistent. Have you seriously considered the distorting power
of something you *want*, even if it is *not* true? You have had many
instances of how what you want can distort what you see and hear. No one
can doubt the ego's skill in building up false cases. Nor can anyone
doubt your willingness to listen until *you* will not to tolerate
anything *except* truth. When *you* lay the ego aside, it will be gone.
The Holy Spirit's Voice is as loud as your willingness to listen. It
cannot be louder without violating your will, which the Holy Spirit
seeks to free but *never* to command.

^79^ The Holy Spirit teaches you to use your body *only* to reach your
brothers, so He can teach His message *through* you. This will heal them
and *therefore* heal *you*. Everything used in accordance with its
function as the Holy Spirit sees it *cannot* be sick. Everything used
otherwise *is.* Do not allow the body to be a mirror of a split mind. Do
not let it be an image of your own perception of littleness. Do not let
it reflect your will to attack. Health is the natural state of anything
whose interpretation is left to the Holy Spirit, Who perceives no attack
on anything. Health is the result of relinquishing *all* attempts to use
the body lovelessly. Health is the beginning of the proper perspective
on life under the guidance of the one Teacher Who knows what life *is*,
being the Voice for Life Itself.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. Healing as Corrected Perception**](#part0004.html#level-63) {#part0013_split_008.html#h1-63 .level1a}

^80^ We once said that the Holy Spirit is the *Answer*. He is the Answer
to everything because He knows what the answer to everything *is*. The
ego does not know what a real question is, although it asks an endless
number. Yet *you* can learn this as you learn to question the value of
the ego and thus establish your ability to evaluate its questions. When
the ego tempts you to sickness, do not ask the Holy Spirit to heal the
body, for this would merely be to accept the ego's belief that the
*body* is the proper aim for healing. Ask rather that the Holy Spirit
teach you the right *perception* of the body, for perception alone can
be distorted. *Only* perception can be sick because only perception can
be *wrong*.

^81^ Wrong perception is *distorted* willing, which wants things to be
as they are not. The *reality* of everything is totally harmless because
total harmlessness is the *condition* of its reality. It is also the
condition of your *awareness* of its reality. You do not have to seek
reality. It will seek *you* and find you when you meet its conditions.
Its conditions are part of what it *is*. And this part only is up to
you. The rest is of itself. You need do so little because it is so
powerful that your little part will bring the whole *to* you. Accept
then your little part, and *let* the whole be yours.

^82^ Wholeness heals because it is of the mind. *All* forms of sickness,
even unto death, are physical expressions of the *fear of awakening*.
They are attempts to reinforce *unconsciousness* out of fear of
*consciousness*. This is a pathetic way of trying *not* to know by
rendering the faculties for knowing ineffectual. "Rest in peace" is a
blessing for the living, not the dead, because rest comes from *waking*,
not from sleeping. Sleep is withdrawing; waking is joining. Dreams are
*illusions* of joining, taking on the ego's distortions about what
joining means if you are sleeping under its guidance. Yet the Holy
Spirit, too, has use for sleep and can use dreams on behalf of *waking*
if you will let Him.

^83^ How you wake is the sign of how you have used sleep. To whom did
you give it? Under which teacher did you place it? Whenever you wake
dispiritedly, it was *not* of the Holy Spirit. *Only* when you awaken
joyously have you utilized sleep according to the Holy Spirit's purpose.
You can indeed be "drugged by sleep," but this is always because you
have *misused* it on behalf of sickness. Sleep is no more a form of
death than death is a form of unconsciousness. *Unconsciousness is
impossible*. You can rest in peace only *because* you are awake.

^84^ Healing is release from the fear of waking and the substitution of
the *will to wake*. The will to wake is the will to love, since *all*
healing involves replacing fear with love. The Holy Spirit cannot
distinguish among degrees of error, for if He taught that one form of
sickness is more serious than another, He would be teaching that one
error can be *more real* than another. His function is to distinguish
*only* between the false and the true, *replacing* the false with the
true.

^85^ The ego, which always *weaken*s the will, wants to *separate* the
body from the mind. This is an attempt to *destroy* it, yet the ego
actually believes that it is *protecting* it. This is because the ego
believes that *mind is dangerous* and that to *make mindless* is to
heal. But to make mindless is impossible, since it would mean to make
nothing out of what God created. The ego despises weakness, even though
it makes every effort to *induce* it. The ego wants *only* what it
hates. To the ego this is perfectly sensible. Believing in the power of
attack, the ego *wants* attack.

^86^ You have surely begun to realize that this is a very practical
course which means *exactly* what it says. So does the Bible, if it is
properly understood. There has been a marked tendency on the part of
many of the Bible's followers and also its translators to be entirely
literal about fear and *its* effects but *not* about love and *its*
results. Thus, "hellfire" means "burning," but raising the dead becomes
allegorical. Actually, it is *particularly* the references to the
outcomes of love which *should* be taken literally because the Bible is
*about* love, being about God.

^87^ The Bible enjoins you to be perfect, to heal *all* errors, to take
no thought of the body *as* separate, and to accomplish all things in my
name. This is not my name alone, for ours is a shared identification.
The name of God's Son is one, and you are enjoined to do the works of
love because we *share* this oneness. Our minds are whole *because* they
are one. If you are sick you are withdrawing from me. Yet you cannot
withdraw from me alone. You can only withdraw from yourself *and* me.

^88^ I would not ask you to do the things you cannot do, and it is
impossible that I could do things you cannot do. Given this, and given
this *quite literally,* there can be nothing which prevents you from
doing *exactl*y what I ask, and everything which argues *for* your doing
it. I give you no limits because God lays none upon you. When you limit
*yourself*, we are *not* of one mind and that *is* sickness. Yet
sickness is not of the body, but of the *mind*. All forms of dysfunction
are merely signs that the mind has split and does not accept a unified
purpose.

^89^ The unification of *purpose*, then, is the Holy Spirit's *only* way
of healing. This is because it is the only level at which healing means
anything. The re-establishing of meaning in a chaotic thought system
*is* the only way to heal it. We have said that your task is only to
meet the conditions *for* meaning since meaning itself is of God. Yet
your *return* to meaning is essential to *His* because your meaning is
*part* of His. Your healing, then, is part of *His* health since it is
part of His Wholeness. He cannot *lose* this, but *you* can not *know*
it. Yet it is still His Will for you, and His Will *must* stand forever
and in all things.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Acceptance of Reality**](#part0004.html#level-64) {#part0013_split_009.html#h1-64 .level1a}

^90^ Fear of the Will of God is one of the strangest beliefs that the
human mind has ever made. This could not possibly have occurred unless
the mind were *already* profoundly split, making it possible for the
mind to be *afraid* of what it really is. It is apparent that reality
cannot "threaten" anything *except* illusions, since reality can only
uphold truth. The very fact that the Will of God, which is what you
*are*, is perceived as fearful to you demonstrates that you *are* afraid
of what you are. It is not, then, the Will of God of which you *are*
afraid, but *yours*. Your will is *not the ego's, and that is why the
ego is against you. What seems to be the fear of God is really only the
fear of your own reality*.

^91^ It is impossible to learn anything consistently in a state of
panic. If the purpose of this course is to help you learn what you are
and if you have already *decided* that what you are is fearful, then it
*must* follow that you will *not* learn this course. Yet you might
remember that the reason *for* the course is that you do *not* know who
you are. If you do not know your reality, how would you know whether it
is fearful or not?

^92^ The association of truth and fear, which would be highly artificial
at most, is particularly inappropriate in the minds of those who do not
know what truth *is*. All that this kind of association means is that
you are arbitrarily endowing something quite beyond your awareness with
something you *do not want*. It is evident, then, that you are judging
something of which you are totally *unaware*. You have set this strange
situation up so that it is completely impossible to escape from it
*without* a Guide who *does* know what your reality is. The purpose of
this Guide is merely to remind you of what you *want*. He is not
attempting to force an alien will *upon* you. He is merely making every
possible effort, within the limits you impose on Him, to *re-establish*
your own will in your consciousness.

^93^ You have *imprisoned* your will in your *unconscious*, where it
remains available but cannot help you. When we said that the Holy
Spirit's function is to sort out the true from the false in your
unconscious, we meant that He has the power to look into what *you* have
hidden and perceive the Will of God there. *His* perception of this Will
can make it real to *you* because He is in your mind and therefore He
*is* your reality. If, then, His perception of your mind brings its
reality to *you*, He *is* teaching you what you are.

^94^ The only source of fear in this whole process can *only* be what
you think you *lose*. Yet it is only what the Holy Spirit sees that you
can possibly *have*. We have emphasized many times that the Holy Spirit
will never call upon you to sacrifice *anything*. But if you ask the
sacrifice of reality of *yourself*, the Holy Spirit *must* remind you
that this is not God's Will *because* it is not yours. There is *no*
difference between your will and God's. If you did not have split minds,
you would recognize that willing is salvation *because* it is
communication. It is impossible to communicate in alien tongues. You and
your Creator can communicate through creation because that, and *only*
that, *is* your joint Will.

^95^ Divided wills do not communicate because they speak for different
things *to the same mind*. This loses the ability to communicate simply
because confused communication does not mean *anything*. A message
cannot be said to be communicated *unless* it makes sense. How sensible
can your messages be when you ask for what you do *not* want? Yet as
long as you are *afraid* of your will, this is precisely what you *will*
ask for. You may insist that the Holy Spirit does not answer you, but it
might be wiser to consider the kind of *asker* you are.

^96^ You do *not* ask only for what you want. This is *solely* because
you are afraid you might *receive* it, *and you would*. That is really
why you persist in asking the teacher who could not possibly *teach* you
your will. Of him you can *never* learn it, and this gives you the
illusion of safety. Yet you cannot be safe *from* truth but only *in*
it. Reality is the *only* safety. Your will is your salvation *because*
it is the same as God's. The separation is nothing more than the belief
that it is *different*.

^97^ No mind can believe that its will is *stronger* than God's. If,
then, a mind believes that *its* will is different from His, it can only
decide either that there *i*s no God or that *God's Will is fearful*.
The former accounts for the atheist and the latter for the martyr.
Martyrdom takes many forms, the category including *all* doctrines which
hold that God demands sacrifices of *any* kind. Either basic type of
insane decision will induce panic, because the atheist believes he is
alone, and the martyr believes that God is crucifying him. Both really
fear abandonment and retaliation, but the atheist is more reactive
against abandonment and the martyr against retaliation.

^98^ The atheist maintains that God has left him, but he does not care.
He will, however, become very fearful and hence very angry if anyone
suggests that God has *not* left him. The martyr, on the other hand, is
more aware of guilt and, believing that punishment is inevitable,
attempts to teach himself to *like* it. The truth is, very simply, that
no one wants *either* abandonment *or* retaliation. Many people *seek*
both, but it is still true that they do not *want* them. Can you ask the
Holy Spirit for "gifts" such as these and actually expect to *receive
them? He cannot make you want something you do not want. When you ask
the Universal Giver for what you do not want, you are asking for what
cannot be given because it was never created*. It was never created
because it was never your will for *you*.

^99^ Ultimately everyone must remember the Will of God because
ultimately everyone must recognize *himself. This recognition is the
recognition that his will and God's are one*. In the presence of truth,
there are *no* unbelievers and *no* sacrifices. In the security of
reality, fear is totally meaningless. To deny what *is* can only *seem*
to be fearful. Fear cannot be real without a cause, and God is the
*only* Cause. God is Love, and you *do* want Him. This *is* your will.
Ask for this and you *will* be answered because you will be asking only
for what *belongs* to you.

^100^ When you ask the Holy Spirit for what would hurt you, He cannot
answer because *nothing* can hurt you *and so you are asking for
nothing*. *Any* desire which stems from the ego *is* a desire for
nothing and to ask for it is *not a request*. It is merely a denial in
the *form* of a request. The Holy Spirit is not concerned with form at
all, being aware only of *meaning*. The ego cannot ask the Holy Spirit
for *anything* because there is *complete communication failure* between
them. Yet *you* can ask for *everything* of the Holy Spirit because
*your* requests are real, being of your will. Would the Holy Spirit deny
the Will of God? And could He fail to recognize it in His Sons?

^101^ The energy which you withdraw from creation you expend on fear.
This is not because your energy is limited but because *you have limited
it*. You do not recognize the enormous waste of energy which you expend
in denying truth. What would you say of someone who persisted in
attempting the impossible, believing that to *achieve* it is *success*?
The belief that you *must* have the impossible in order to be happy is
totally at variance with the principle of creation. God *could* not will
that happiness *depended* on what you could never *have*.

^102^ The fact that God is love does not require belief, but it *does*
require acceptance. It is indeed possible for you to *deny* facts,
although it is impossible for you to *change* them. If you hold your
hands over your eyes, you will *not* see, because you are interfering
with the laws of seeing. If you deny love, you will *not* know it,
because your cooperation is *the law of its being*. You cannot change
laws you did not make, and the laws of happiness were created *for* you,
not *by* you.

^103^ Attempts of any kind to deny what *is* are fearful, and if they
are strong, they *will* induce panic. Willing *against* reality, though
impossible, can be *made* into a very persistent goal, *even though you
do not want it*. But consider the result of this strange decision. You
are *devoting* your mind to what you do not want. How real can this
devotion *be*? If you do not want it, it was never created. If it was
never created, it is nothing. Can you *really* devote yourself to
nothing?

^104^ God in His devotion to you created you devoted to *everything* and
*gave* you what you are devoted to. Otherwise, you would not have been
created perfect. Reality *is everything*, and therefore you have
everything *because* you are real. You cannot make the unreal, because
the *absence* of reality is fearful, and fear cannot *be* created. As
long as you believe that fear is possible, *you will not create*.
Opposing orders of reality *make reality meaningless*, and reality *is*
meaning.

^105^ Remember, then, that God's Will is *already* possible and nothing
else will *ever* be. This is the simple acceptance of reality because
only this *is* real. You cannot *distort* reality and *know* what it is.
And if you *do* distort reality, you will experience anxiety,
depression, and ultimately panic, because you are trying to *make*
yourself unreal. When you feel these things, do not try to look *beyond*
yourself for truth, for truth can only be *within* you. Say, therefore,

^106^ Christ is in me and where He is God must be, for Christ is part of
Him.
:::

[]{#part0013_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The Answer to Prayer**](#part0004.html#level-65) {#part0013_split_010.html#h1-65 .level1a}

^107^ Everyone who has ever tried to use prayer to request something has
experienced what appears to be failure. This is not only true in
connection with specific things which might be harmful but also in
connection with requests which are strictly in line with this course.
The latter, in particular, might be incorrectly interpreted as "proof"
that the course does not mean what it says. You must remember, however,
that the course does state, and repeatedly, that its purpose is the
*escape* from fear.

^108^ Let us suppose, then, that what you request of the Holy Spirit
*is* what you really want, but you are still *afraid* of it. Should this
be the case, your *attainment* of it would no longer *be* what you want,
even if *it* is. This accounts for why certain *specific* forms of
healing are not achieved, even though the state of healing *is*. It
frequently happens that an individual asks for physical healing because
he is fearful of *bodily* harm. At the same time, however, if he *were*
healed physically, the threat to his thought system would be
considerably *more* fearful to him than its physical expression. In this
case he is not really asking for *release* from fear but for the removal
of a symptom which *he* has selected. This request is, therefore, *not*
for healing at all.

^109^ The Bible emphasizes that *all* prayers are answered, and this
must be true if no effort is wasted. The very fact that one has asked
the Holy Spirit for *anything* will ensure a response. Yet it is equally
certain that *no* response given by the Holy Spirit will *ever* be one
which would increase fear. It is possible that His answer will not be
heard at all. It is *impossible*, however, that it will be lost. There
are many answers which you have already received but have not yet
*heard*. I assure you that they are waiting for you. It is indeed true
that no effort is wasted.

^110^ If you would know your prayers are answered, never doubt a Son of
God. Do not question him and do not confound him, for your faith in him
is your faith in *yourself*. If you would know God and His Answer,
believe in me whose faith in you cannot be shaken. Can you ask of the
Holy Spirit truly and doubt your brother? Believe his words are true
because of the truth which is in him. You will unite with the truth *in*
him, and his words will *be* true. As you hear *him*, you will hear
*me*. *Listening* to truth is the only way you can hear it now and
finally *know* it.

^111^ The message your brother gives you is *up to you*. What does he
say to you? What would you *have* him say? Your decision *about* him
determines the message you receive. Remember that the Holy Spirit is in
him, and His Voice speaks to you *through* him. What can so holy a
brother tell you *except* truth? But are you *listening* to it? Your
brother may not know who he is, but there is a light in his mind which
*does* know. This light can shine into yours, making *his* words true
and making *you* able to hear them. His words *are* the Holy Spirit's
answer to you. Is your faith in him strong enough to let you hear?

^112^ Salvation is of your brother. The Holy Spirit extends from your
mind to his and answers *you*. You cannot hear the Voice for God in
yourself alone because you are *not* alone. And His answer is only for
what you *are*. You will not know the trust I have in you unless you
*extend* it. You will not trust the guidance of the Holy Spirit or
believe that it is for you unless you hear it in others. It *must* be
for your brother *because* it is for you. Would God have created a Voice
for you alone? Could you hear His answer *except* as He answers *all* of
God's Sons? Hear of your brother what you would have me hear of you, for
you would not want *me* to be deceived.

^113^ I love you for the truth in you, as God does. Your deceptions may
deceive *you*, but they *cannot* deceive *me*. Knowing what you are, I
*cannot* doubt you. I hear only the Holy Spirit in you, who speaks to me
through *you*. If you would hear *me*, hear my brothers in whom God's
Voice speaks. The answer to *all* prayers lies in them. You will be
answered as you hear the answer in *everyone*. Do not listen to anything
else, or you will not hear truth.

^114^ Believe in your brothers *because* I believe in you, and you will
learn that my belief in you is justified. Believe in me *by* believing
in them for the sake of what God gave them. They *will* answer you if
you learn to ask truth of them. Do not ask for blessings without
blessing them, for only in this way can you learn how blessed *you* are.
By following this way, you *are* looking for the truth in you. This is
not going *beyond* yourself but *toward* yourself. Hear only God's
Answer in His Sons, and you *are* answered.

^115^ To disbelieve is to side against or to *attack*. To believe is to
accept and to *side* with. To believe is not to be credulous but to
accept and *appreciate*. What you do not believe, you do not appreciate,
and you *cannot* be grateful for what you do not value. There *is* a
price you will pay for judgment because judgment *is* the setting of a
price. And as you set it, you *will* pay it.

^116^ If paying is equated with *getting*, you will set the price low
but demand a high *return*. You will have forgotten \[that to price is
to *value,* so\] that your return is in *proportion* to your judgment of
worth. If paying is associated with *giving*, it cannot *be* perceived
as loss, and the *reciprocal* relationship of giving and receiving will
be recognized. The price will then be set high because of the value of
the return. The price for *getting* is to lose sight of value, making it
inevitable that you will *not* value what you receive. Valuing it
little, you will not appreciate it and will not *want* it.

^117^ Never forget, then, that *you* have set the value on what you
receive and have priced it by what you give. To believe that it is
possible to get much for little is to believe that you can bargain with
God. God's laws are *always* fair and perfectly consistent. *By* giving
you receive. But to receive is to *accept*, not to get. It is impossible
not to *have*, but it *is* possible not to *know* you have. The
recognition of having is the willingness for *giving*, and *only* by
this willingness can you recognize what you have. What you give is
therefore the value you put on what you have, being the exact measure of
the value you put upon it. And this, in turn, is the measure of how much
you *want* it.

^118^ You can *ask* of the Holy Spirit, then, only by giving *to* Him,
and you can *give* to Him only where you *see* Him. If you see Him in
everyone, consider how much you will be *asking* of Him and *how much
you will receive*. He will deny you nothing because you have denied
*Him* nothing, and so you can share everything. This is the way, and the
*only* way, to have His answer because His answer is all you *can* ask
for and *want*. Say, then, to everyone,

^119^ Because I will to know myself, I see you as God's Son? and my
brother.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Nine**](#part0004.html#chap-9) {#part0014_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Correction of Error**](#part0004.html#chap-9) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-66) {#part0014_split_000.html#h1-66 .level1a1}

^9:1^ The alertness of the ego to the errors which other egos make is
not the kind of vigilance the Holy Spirit would have you maintain. Egos
are critical in terms of the kind of "sense" they stand for. *They*
understand this kind of sense because it *is* sensible to them. To the
Holy Spirit, it makes no sense at all. To the ego, it is kind and right
and good to point out errors and "correct" them. This makes perfect
sense to the ego, which is totally unaware of what errors *are* and what
correction *is*.

^2^ Errors *are* of the ego, and correction of errors of any kind lies
solely in the *relinquishment* of the ego. When you correct a brother,
you are telling him that he is wrong. He may be making no sense at the
time, and it is certain that if he is speaking from the ego, he *will*
be making no sense. But your task is still to tell him he is *right*.
You do not tell him this verbally if he is speaking foolishly because he
needs correction at *another* level, since his error *is* at another
level. *He* is still right because he is a Son of God. His ego is always
wrong, no matter *what* it says or does.

^3^ If you point out the errors of your brother's ego, you must be
seeing through *yours*, because the Holy Spirit does not perceive his
errors. This must be true if there is no communication at all between
the ego and the Holy Spirit. The ego makes no sense, and the Holy Spirit
does not attempt to understand anything that arises from it. Since He
does not understand it, He does not *judge* it, knowing that nothing it
engenders means anything.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Sanity and Perception**](#part0004.html#level-67) {#part0014_split_001.html#h1-67 .level1a}

^4^ When you react *at* all to errors, you are not listening to the Holy
Spirit. He has merely disregarded them, and if you attend to them, you
are not hearing *Him.* If you do not hear Him, you *are* listening to
your ego and making as little sense as the brother whose errors you
perceive. This cannot be correction. Yet it is more than merely lack of
correction for him. It is the giving up of correction in *yourself*.

^5^ When a brother behaves insanely, you can heal him only by perceiving
the *sanity* in him. If you perceive his errors and *accept* them, you
are accepting *yours*. If you want to give yours over to the Holy
Spirit, you must do this with his. Unless this becomes the one way in
which you handle *all* errors, you cannot understand how all errors are
*undone*. How is this different from telling you that what you teach you
learn? Your brother is as right as you are, and if you think he is
wrong, you are condemning yourself.

^6^ *You* cannot correct *yourself*. Is it possible, then, for you to
correct another? Yet you *can* see him truly because it is possible for
you to see *yourself* truly. It is not up to you to change him but
merely to accept him as he *is.* His errors do not come from the truth
that is in him, and only this truth is yours. His errors cannot change
this and can have no effect at all on the truth in *you*. To perceive
errors in anyone and to react to them as if they were real is to *make*
them real to you. You will not escape paying the price for this, not
because you are being punished for it, but because you are following the
wrong guide and will lose your way.

^7^ Your brother's errors are not of him any more than yours are of
*you*. Accept his errors as real, and you have attacked *yourself*. If
you would find your way and keep it, see only truth beside you, for you
walk together. The Holy Spirit in you forgives all things in you *and*
in your brother. *His* errors are forgiven *with* yours. Atonement is no
more separate than love. Atonement cannot be separate because it *comes*
from love. *Any* attempt you make to correct a brother means that you
believe correction by *you* is possible, and this can *only* be the
arrogance of the ego. Correction is of God, Who does not know of
arrogance. The Holy Spirit forgives everything *because* God created
everything.

^8^ Do not undertake *His* function, or you will forget *yours*. Accept
*only* the function of healing in time because that is what time is
*for*. God *gave* you the function to create in eternity. You do not
need to learn this, but you *do* need to learn to *want* this, and for
this all learning was made. This is the Holy Spirit's good use of an
ability which you do not *need*, but which you *have* made. Give it to
Him! You do not know how to use it. He will teach you how to see
yourself without condemnation by learning how to look on *everything*
without it. Condemnation will then not be real to you, and all your
errors *will* be forgiven.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Atonement as a Lesson in Sharing**](#part0004.html#level-68) {#part0014_split_002.html#h1-68 .level1a}

^9^ Atonement is for all, because it is the way to *undo* the belief
that anything is for you alone. To forgive is to *overlook*. Look, then,
*beyond* error, and do not let your perception rest *upon* it, for you
will believe what your perception holds. Accept as true only what your
brother *is* if you would know yourself. Perceive what he is *not*, and
you cannot know what you are *because* you see him falsely. Remember
always that your identity is shared and that sharing *is* its reality.

^10^ You have a part to play in the Atonement, but the plan of the
Atonement *is* beyond you. You do not know how to overlook errors, or
you would not make them. It would merely be further error to think
either that you do *not* make them or that you can correct them
*without* a Guide to correction. And if you do not *follow* this Guide,
your errors will *not* be corrected. The plan is not yours *because* of
your limited ideas of what you are. This limitation is where *all*
errors arise. The way to undo them, therefore, is not *of* you but *for*
you.

^11^ The Atonement is a lesson in sharing which is given you because
*you have forgotten how to do it*. The Holy Spirit merely reminds you of
what is your natural ability. By reinterpreting the ability to attack,
which you *did* make, into the ability to *share*, He translates what
you have made into what God created. If you would accomplish this
*through* Him, you cannot look on your abilities through the eyes of the
ego or you will judge them as *it* does. All their harmfulness lies in
its judgment. All their helpfulness lies in the judgment of the Holy
Spirit.

^12^ The ego, too, has a plan of forgiveness because you are *asking*
for one, though not of the right teacher. The ego's plan, of course,
*makes no sense* and *will not work*. By following it, you will merely
place yourself in an impossible situation to which the ego *always*
leads you. The ego's plan is to have you see error clearly *first* and
*then* overlook it. Yet how can you overlook what you have made real? By
seeing it clearly, you *have* made it real and *cannot* overlook it.

^13^ This is where the ego is forced to appeal to "mysteries" and begins
to insist that you must accept the meaningless to save yourself. Many
have tried to do this in my name, forgetting that my words make
*perfect* sense because they come from God. They are as sensible now as
they ever were because they speak of ideas which are eternal.
Forgiveness that is learned of me does *not* use fear to *undo* fear.
Nor does it make real the *unreal* and then destroy it.

^14^ Forgiveness through the Holy Spirit lies simply in looking beyond
error from the beginning and thus *keeping* it unreal for you. Do not
let any belief in its realness enter your minds *at all*, or you will
also believe that *you* must undo what you have made in order to be
forgiven. What has no effect does not exist, and to the Holy Spirit, the
effects of error are *totally* non-existent. By steadily and
consistently canceling out *all* its effects *everywhere* and in *all*
respects, He teaches that the ego does not exist and *proves* it. Follow
His teaching in forgiveness then, because forgiveness *is* His function,
and He knows how to fulfill it perfectly. That is what we meant when we
once said that miracles are *natural*, and when they do *not* occur,
something has gone wrong.

^15^ Miracles are merely the sign of your willingness to follow the Holy
Spirit's plan of salvation in recognition of the fact that you do *not*
know what it is. His work is *not* your function, and unless you accept
this, you cannot learn what *your* function is. The confusion of
functions is so typical of the ego that you should be quite familiar
with it by now. The ego believes that *all* functions belong to it, even
though it has no idea what they *are*. This is more than mere confusion.
It is a particularly dangerous combination of grandiosity *and*
confusion which makes it likely that the ego will attack anyone and
anything for no reason at all. This is exactly what the ego *does*. It
is *totally* unpredictable in its responses because it has no idea of
*what* it perceives.

^16^ If one has no idea of what is happening, how appropriately can you
*expect* him to react? You might still ask yourself, regardless of how
you can *account* for the reactions, whether they place the ego in a
very sound position as the guide for *yours*. It seems absurd to have to
emphasize repeatedly that the ego's qualifications as a guide are
singularly unfortunate and that it is a remarkably poor choice as a
teacher of salvation. Yet this question, ridiculous as it seems, is
really the crucial issue in the whole separation fantasy. Anyone who
elects a totally insane guide *must* be totally insane himself.

^17^ It is not true that you do not know the guide is insane. *You* know
it because *I* know it, and you *have* judged it by the same standard as
I have. The ego literally lives on borrowed time, and its days are
numbered. Do not fear the Last Judgment, but welcome it and do not wait,
for the ego's time is borrowed from *your* eternity. This *is* the
Second Coming, which was made *for* you as the First was created. The
Second Coming is merely the return of *sense*. Can this *possibly* be
fearful?

^18^ What can be fearful but fantasy, and no one turns to fantasy unless
he despairs of finding satisfaction in reality. Yet it is certain that
he will *never* find satisfaction in fantasy, so that his only hope is
to *change his mind about reality*. Only if the decision that reality is
fearful is *wrong* can God be right. And I assure you that God *is*
right. Be glad, then, that you *have* been wrong, but this was only
because you did not know who you were. Had you remembered, you could no
more have been wrong than God can. The impossible can happen *only* in
fantasy. When you search for reality in fantasies, you will not find it.
The symbols of fantasy are of the ego, and of *these* you will find
many. But do not look for meaning in them. They have no more meaning
than the fantasies into which they are woven.

^19^ Fairy tales can be pleasant or fearful, pretty or ugly, but no one
calls them *true*. Children may believe them, and so for a while the
tales *are* true for them. Yet when reality dawns, the fantasies are
gone. *Reality* has not gone in the meanwhile. The Second Coming is the
*awareness* of reality, not its *return*. Behold, my children, reality
is here. It belongs to you and me and God and is perfectly satisfying to
all of us. *Only* this awareness heals because it is the awareness of
truth.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Unhealed Healer**](#part0004.html#level-69) {#part0014_split_003.html#h1-69 .level1a}

^20^ The ego's plan for forgiveness is far more widely used than God's.
This is because it is undertaken by unhealed healers and is therefore of
the ego. Let us consider the unhealed healer more carefully now. By
definition, he is trying to *give* what he has not *received*. If he is
a theologian, he may begin with the premise, "I am a miserable sinner
and so are you." If he is a psychotherapist, he is more likely to start
with the equally incredible idea that *he* really believes in attack and
so does the patient, but it does not matter in either case.

^21^ We have repeatedly stated that beliefs of the ego cannot be shared,
and this is *why* they are unreal. How, then, can "uncovering" them
*make* them real? Every healer who searches fantasies for truth *must*
be unhealed because he does not *know* where to look for truth and
therefore does not have the answer to the problem of healing. There is
an advantage to bringing nightmares into awareness, but *only* to teach
that they are not real and that *anything* they contain is meaningless.
The unhealed healer cannot do this because he does not *believe* it.

^22^ All unhealed healers follow the ego's plan for forgiveness in one
form or another. If they are theologians, they are likely to condemn
themselves, teach condemnation, and advocate a very fearful solution.
Projecting condemnation onto God, they make Him appear retaliative and
fear His retribution. What they have done is merely to *identify* with
the ego and, by perceiving clearly what *it* does, condemn themselves
because of this profound confusion. It is understandable that there has
been a revolt against this concept, but to revolt *against* it is still
to *believe* in it. The *form* of the revolt, then, is different but
*not* the content.

^23^ The newer forms of the ego's plan are as unhelpful as the older
ones because form does not matter to the Holy Spirit and therefore does
not matter at all. According to the newer forms of the ego's plan, the
therapist interprets the ego's symbols in the nightmare and then uses
them to prove that the *nightmare* is real. Having *made* it real, he
then attempts to dispel its effects by depreciating the importance *of
the dreamer*. This *would* be a healing approach if the dreamer were
properly identified as unreal. Yet if the dreamer is equated with the
*mind*, the mind's corrective power through the Holy Spirit is *denied*.

^24^ It is noteworthy that this is a contradiction even in the ego's
terms, and one which it usually *does* note, even in its confusion. If
the way to counteract fear is to *reduce* the importance of the fearer,
how can this build ego *strength*? These perfectly self-evident
inconsistencies account for why, except in certain stylized verbal
accounts, no one can *explain* what happens in psychotherapy. Nothing
real *does*. Nothing real has happened to the unhealed healer, and he
learns from his own teaching.

^25^ *Because* his ego is involved, it always attempts to gain some
support from the situation. Seeking to get something for *himself*, the
unhealed healer does not know how to *give* and consequently cannot
share. He cannot correct because he is not working *correctively*. He
believes that it is up to him to teach the patient what is *real*, but
he does not know it himself. What, then, *should* happen? When God said,
"Let there be light," there *was* light. Can you find light by analyzing
darkness as the psychotherapist does or like the theologian, by
acknowledging darkness in yourself and looking for a distant light to
remove it while *emphasizing* the distance?

^26^ Healing is *not* mysterious. Nothing will occur unless you
understand it, since light *is* understanding. A "miserable sinner"
cannot be healed without magic, nor can an "unimportant mind" esteem
itself without magic. Both forms of the ego's approach, then, must
arrive at an impasse, the characteristic "impossible situation" to which
the ego *always* leads. It *can* be helpful to point out to a patient
where he is heading, but the point is lost unless he can change his
direction. The therapist cannot do this for him, but he also cannot do
this for *himself*.

^27^ The *only* meaningful contribution the therapist can make is to
present an example of one whose direction has been changed *for* him and
who no longer believes in nightmares of *any* kind. The light in *his*
mind will therefore *answer* the questioner, who must decide with God
that there *is* light because he *sees* it. And by *his* acknowledgment,
the *therapist* knows it is there. That is how perception ultimately is
translated into knowledge. The miracle worker begins by *perceiving*
light and translates *his* perception into sureness by continually
extending it and accepting its acknowledgment. Its *effects* assure him
it is there.

^28^ The therapist does not heal; *he lets healing be*. He can point to
darkness, but he cannot bring light of *himself*, for light is not of
him. Yet, being *for* him, it must also be for his patient. The Holy
Spirit is the *only* therapist. He makes healing perfectly clear in
*any* situation in which he is the Guide. The human therapist can only
let Him *fulfill* His function. He needs no help for this. He will tell
you *exactly* what to do to help *anyone* He sends to you for help and
will speak to him through you if you do not *interfere*. Remember that
you *are* choosing a guide for helping, and the *wrong* choice will
*not* help. But remember also that the *right* one *will*. Trust Him,
for help is His function, and He is of God.

^29^ As you awaken other minds to the Holy Spirit through Him and *not*
yourself, you will understand that you are not obeying the laws of this
world, but that the laws you are obeying *work*. "The good is what
works" is a sound, though insufficient, statement. *Only* the good *can*
work. Nothing else works at all. This course is a guide to behavior.
Being a very direct and very simple learning situation, it provides the
Guide who *tells* you what to do. If you do it, you will *see* that it
works. Its *results* are more convincing than its words. They will
convince you that the words are true. By following the right Guide you
will learn the simplest of all lessons---

^30^ By their fruits ye shall know them,\
and they shall know themselves.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Awareness of the Holy Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-70) {#part0014_split_004.html#h1-70 .level1a}

^31^ How can you become increasingly aware of the Holy Spirit in you
*except* by His effects? You cannot see Him with your eyes nor hear Him
with your ears. How, then, can you perceive Him at all? If you inspire
joy, and others react to you *with* joy even though you are not
experiencing joy yourself, there *must* be something in you that is
capable of producing it. If it is in you and *can* produce joy, and if
you see that it *does* produce joy in others, you *must* be dissociating
it in yourself.

^32^ It seems to you that the Holy Spirit does *not* produce joy
consistently in you *only* because you do not consistently *arouse* joy
in others. Their reactions to you *are* your evaluations of His
consistency. When you are inconsistent, you will not always *give rise*
to joy and so you will not always *recognize* His consistency. What you
offer to your brother, you offer to Him because He cannot go *beyond*
your offering in His giving. This is not because *He* limits His giving,
but simply because you have limited your *receiving*. The will to
receive is the will to accept.

^33^ If your brothers *are* part of you, will you *accept* them? Only
they can teach you what you are, and your learning is the result of what
you taught them. What you call upon in them, you call upon in
*yourself*. And as you call upon it in them, it becomes real to *you*.
God has but one Son, knowing them all *as* one. Only God Himself is more
than they, but they are not less than He is. Would you know what this
means? If what you do to my brother you do to me, and if you do
everything for yourself because we are *part* of you, everything *we* do
belongs to you as well. Every Soul God created *is* part of you and
shares His glory *with* you. His Glory belongs to Him, but it is equally
*yours*. You cannot, then, be *less* glorious than He is.

^34^ God is more than you only because He *created* you, but not even
this would He keep from you. Therefore you *can* create as He did, and
your dissociation will *not* alter this. Neither God's light *nor* yours
is dimmed because you do not see. Because the Sonship *must* create as
one, you remember creation whenever you recognize *part* of creation.
Each part you remember adds to *your* wholeness because each part *is*
whole. Wholeness is indivisible, but you cannot learn of your wholeness
until you see it *everywhere*. You can *know* yourself only as God knows
His Son, for knowledge is shared *with* God. When you awake in Him you
will know your magnitude by accepting His limitlessness as *yours*, but
meanwhile you will judge it as you judge your brothers' and will accept
it as you accept *theirs*.

^35^ You are not yet awake, but you can learn *how* to awaken. Very
simply the Holy Spirit teaches you to awaken others. As you see them
waken, you will learn what waking *means*, and because you have willed
to wake them, their gratitude and their appreciation of what you have
given them will teach *you* its value. *They* will become the witnesses
to your reality, as *you* were created witnesses to God's. Yet when the
Sonship comes together and *accepts* its oneness, it will be known by
its creations, who witness to its reality as the Son does to the Father.

^36^ Miracles have no place in eternity because they are reparative. Yet
while you still need healing, your miracles are the only witnesses to
your reality which you can *recognize*. You cannot perform a miracle for
*yourself* because miracles are a way of *giving* acceptance *and*
receiving it. In time, the giving comes first, though they are
simultaneous in eternity, where they cannot be separated. When you have
learned that they *are* the same, the need for time is over.

^37^ Eternity is *one* time, its only dimension being "always." This
cannot mean anything to you, however, until you remember God's open arms
and finally know His open Mind. Like Him, *you* are "always"-in His mind
and with a mind like His. In *your* open mind are *your* creations, in
perfect communication born of perfect understanding. Could you but
accept one of them, you would not want *anything* the world has to
offer. Everything else would be totally meaningless. God's meaning is
incomplete without you, and you are incomplete without your creations.
Accept your brother in this world and accept *nothing* else, for in him
you will find your creations because he created them *with* you. You
will never know that you are co-creator with God until you learn that
your brother is a co-creator with *you*.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Salvation and God's Will**](#part0004.html#level-71) {#part0014_split_005.html#h1-71 .level1a}

^38^ God's Will is your salvation. Would He not have given you the means
to find it? If He wills you to *have* it, He must have made it possible
and very easy to obtain it. Your brothers are everywhere. You do not
have to seek far for salvation. Every minute and every second gives you
a chance to save *yourself*. Do not lose these chances, not because they
will not return, but because delay of joy is needless. God wills you
perfect happiness *now*. Is it possible that this is not also *your*
will? And is it possible that this is not *also* the will of your
brothers?

^39^ Consider, then, that in this joint will you *are* all united, and
in this *only*. There will be disagreement on anything else, but *not*
on this. This, then, is where peace *abides*. And *you* abide in peace
when you so decide. Yet you cannot abide in peace unless you accept the
Atonement, because the Atonement *is* the way to peace. The reason is
very simple and so obvious that it is often overlooked. That is because
the ego is *afraid* of the obvious since obviousness is the essential
characteristic of reality. Yet *you* cannot overlook it unless you are
*not looking*.

^40^ It is *perfectly* obvious that if the Holy Spirit looks with love
on *all* He perceives, He looks with love on *you*. His evaluation of
you is based on His knowledge of what you are, and so He evaluates you
truly. And this evaluation *must* be in your mind because *He* is. The
ego is also in your mind because you have *accepted* it there. *Its*
evaluation of you, however, is the exact opposite of the Holy Spirit's
because the ego does *not* love you. It is unaware of what you are and
wholly mistrustful of *everything* it perceives because its own
perceptions are so shifting. The ego is therefore capable of
suspiciousness at best and viciousness at worst. That is its range. It
cannot exceed it because of its uncertainty. And it can never go
*beyond* it because it can never *be* certain.

^41^ You, then, have two *conflicting* evaluations of yourself in your
minds, and they *cannot* both be true. You do not yet realize how
*completely* different these evaluations are because you do not
understand how lofty the Holy Spirit's perception of you really is. He
is not deceived by anything you do because He never forgets what you
*are*. The ego is deceived by everything you do, even when you respond
to the Holy Spirit, because at such times its confusion *increases*. The
ego is, therefore, particularly likely to attack you when you react
lovingly because it has evaluated you as *unloving*, and you are going
*against* its judgment.

^42^ The ego will begin to *attack* your motives as soon as they become
clearly out of accord with its perception of you. This is when it will
shift abruptly from suspiciousness to viciousness, since its uncertainty
is increased. Yet it is surely pointless to attack in return. What can
this mean except that you are *agreeing* with the ego's evaluation of
what you are? If you are willing to see yourself as unloving, you will
*not* be happy. You are condemning yourself and *must* therefore regard
yourself as inadequate. Would you look to the ego to help you escape
from a sense of inadequacy it has *produced* and must *maintain* for its
existence? Can you *escape* from its evaluation of you by using its
methods for keeping this picture *intact*?

^43^ You cannot evaluate an insane belief system from *within* it. Its
own range precludes this. You can only go *beyond* it, look back from a
point where *sanity* exists, *and see the contrast*. Only *by* this
contrast can insanity be judged as insane. With the grandeur of God in
you, you have chosen to be little and to lament your littleness.
*Within* the system which dictated this choice, the lament *is*
inevitable. Your littleness is taken for granted there, and you do *not*
ask, "Who granted it?" The question is meaningless within the ego's
thought system because it opens the *whole* thought system to question.

^44^ We said before that the ego does not know what a real question is.
Lack of knowledge of any kind is always associated with *unwillingness*
to know and produces a total lack of knowledge simply because knowledge
*is* total. *Not* to question your littleness, therefore, is to deny
*all* knowledge and keep the ego's *whole* thought system intact. You
cannot retain *part* of a thought system because it can be questioned
*only* at its foundation. And this must be questioned from beyond it
because, *within* it, its foundation *does* stand. The Holy Spirit
judges against the reality of the ego's thought system merely because He
knows its *foundation* is not true. Therefore, nothing that arises from
it means anything. The Holy Spirit judges every belief you hold in terms
of where it comes from. If it comes from God, He knows it to be true. If
it does not, He knows that it is meaningless.

^45^ Whenever you question your value, say:

^46^ God Himself is incomplete without me.

^47^ Remember this when the ego speaks, and you will not hear it. The
truth about you is so lofty that nothing unworthy of God is worthy of
you. Choose, then, what you want in these terms and accept nothing that
you would not offer to God as wholly fitting for Him, for you do not
*want* anything else. Return your part of Him, and He will give you all
of Himself in exchange for your return of what belongs to Him and
renders Him complete.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Grandeur Versus Grandiosity**](#part0004.html#level-72) {#part0014_split_006.html#h1-72 .level1a}

^48^ Grandeur is of God and *only* of Him. Therefore, it is in you.
Whenever you become aware of it, however dimly, you abandon the ego
automatically because in the presence of the grandeur of God the
meaninglessness of the ego becomes perfectly apparent. Though it does
not understand this, the ego believes that its "enemy" has struck and
attempts to offer gifts to induce you to return to its "protection."
*Self*-inflation of the ego is its alternative to the grandeur of God.
Which will you choose?

^49^ Grandiosity is *always* a cover for despair. It is without hope
because it is not real. It is an attempt to counteract your littleness,
based on the belief that the littleness is *real*. Without this belief,
grandiosity is meaningless, and you could not possibly want it. The
essence of grandiosity is competitiveness because it *always* involves
attack. It is a delusional attempt to *outdo* but *not* to undo. We said
before that the ego vacillates between suspiciousness and viciousness.
It remains suspicious as long as you despair of yourself. It shifts to
viciousness whenever you will not tolerate self-abasement and seek
relief. Then it offers you the illusion of attack as a solution.

^50^ The ego does not know the difference between grandeur and
grandiosity because it does not know the difference between miracle
impulses and ego-alien beliefs of its own. We once said that the ego
*is* aware of threat, but does not make distinctions between two
entirely different kinds of threat to its existence. Its own profound
sense of vulnerability renders it incapable of judgment *except* in
terms of attack. When it experiences threat, its only decision is
whether to attack *now* or to withdraw to attack later. If you accept
its offer of grandiosity, it will attack immediately. If you do not, it
will wait.

^51^ The ego is immobilized in the presence of God's grandeur because
*His* grandeur establishes *your* freedom. Even the faintest hint of
your reality literally drives the ego from your mind because of complete
lack of investment in it. Grandeur is totally *without* illusions, and
because it is real, it is compellingly convincing. Yet the conviction of
reality will not remain with you unless you do not allow the ego to
attack it. The ego will make every effort to recover and mobilize its
energies *against* your release. It will tell you that you are insane
and argue that grandeur *cannot* be a real part of you because of the
littleness in which *it* believes.

^52^ Yet your grandeur is not delusional *becaus* you did not make it.
*You* have made grandiosity and are afraid of it because it is a form of
attack, but your grandeur is of God, Who created it out of His Love.
From your grandeur you can only bless, because your grandeur is your
*abundance*. By blessing, you hold it in your mind, protecting it from
illusions and keeping yourself in the Mind of God. Remember always that
you cannot be anywhere *except* in the Mind of God. When you forget
this, you *will* despair, and you *will* attack.

^53^ The ego depends *solely* on your willingness to tolerate it. If you
are willing to look upon your grandeur, you *cannot* despair, and
therefore you cannot *want* the ego. Your grandeur is God's *answer* to
the ego because it is true. Littleness and grandeur cannot co-exist, nor
is it possible for them to alternate in your awareness. Littleness and
grandiosity can and *must* alternate in your awareness since both are
untrue and are therefore on the same level. Being the level of shift, it
is experienced as shifting, and extremes are its essential
characteristic.

^54^ Truth and littleness are *denials* of each other because grandeur
*is* truth. Truth does not vacillate; it is *always* true. When grandeur
slips away from you, you have replaced it with something *you* have
made. Perhaps it is the belief in littleness; perhaps it is the belief
in grandiosity. Yet it *must* be insane because it is *not* true. Your
grandeur will *never* deceive you, but your illusions *always* will.
Illusions *are* deceptions. You cannot triumph, but you *are* exalted.
And in your exalted state, you seek others like you and rejoice with
them.

^55^ It is easy to distinguish grandeur from grandiosity because love is
returned, but pride is not. Pride will not produce miracles and
therefore will deprive you of your true witnesses to your reality. Truth
is not obscure nor hidden, but its obviousness to *you* lies in the joy
you bring to its witnesses, who *show* it to you. They attest to your
grandeur, but they cannot attest to pride because pride is not shared.
God *wants* you to behold what He created because it is His joy.

^56^ Can your grandeur be arrogant when God Himself witnesses to it? And
what can be real that *has* no witnesses? What good can come of it? And
if no good can come of it, the Holy Spirit cannot use it. What He cannot
transform to the Will of God does not exist at all. Grandiosity is
delusional because it is used to *replace* your grandeur. Yet what God
has created cannot *be* replaced. God is incomplete without you because
His grandeur is total, and you cannot *be* missing from it.

^57^ You are altogether irreplaceable in the Mind of God. No one else
can fill your part of It, and while you leave your part of It empty,
your eternal place merely waits for your return. God, through His Voice,
reminds you of It, and God Himself keeps your extensions safe within It.
Yet you do not know them until you return to them. You *cannot* replace
the Kingdom, and you cannot replace *yourself*. God, Who *knows* your
value, would not have it so, and so it is *not* so. Your value is in
*God's* Mind and therefore not in yours alone. To accept yourself as God
created you cannot be arrogance because it is the *denial* of arrogance.
To accept your littleness *is* arrogant because it means that you
believe *your* evaluation of yourself is *truer* than God's.

^58^ Yet if truth is indivisible, your evaluation of yourself must *be*
God's. You did not establish your value, and it *needs* no defense.
Nothing can attack it or prevail over it. It does not vary. It merely
*is*. Ask the Holy Spirit *what* it is and He will tell you, but do not
be afraid of His answer, for it comes from God. It *is* an exalted
answer because of its Source, but the Source is true and so is Its
answer. Listen and do not question what you hear, for God does not
deceive. He would have you replace the ego's belief in littleness with
His own exalted answer to the question of your being, so that you can
cease to question it and *know* it for what it *is*.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Inclusiveness of Creation**](#part0004.html#level-73) {#part0014_split_007.html#h1-73 .level1a}

^59^ Nothing beyond yourself can make you fearful or loving because
nothing *is* beyond you. Time and eternity are both in your mind and
*will* conflict until you perceive time solely as a means to *regain*
eternity. You cannot do this as long as you believe that *anything*
which happens to you is caused by factors *outside* yourself. You must
learn that time is solely at *your* disposal, and that nothing in the
world can take this responsibility from you. You can *violate* God's
laws in your imagination, but you cannot *escape* from them. They were
established for your protection and are as inviolate as your safety.

^60^ God created nothing beside you, and nothing beside you exists, for
you are part of Him. What except Him *can* exist? Nothing *beyond* Him
can happen because nothing *except* Him is real. Your creations add to
Him as *you* do, but nothing is added that is different because
everything has always *been*. What can upset you except the ephemeral,
and how can the ephemeral be real if you are God's *only* creation, and
He created you eternal? Your holy will establishes *everything* that
happens to you. *Every* response you make to *everything* you perceive
is up to you because your will determines your perception of it.

^61^ God does not change His Mind about *you*, for He is not uncertain
of *Himself*. And what He knows *can* be known because He does not know
only for Himself. He created you for Himself, but He gave you the power
to create for *your* self so you could be like Him. That is *why* your
will is holy. Can anything exceed the love of God? Can anything, then,
exceed *your* will? Nothing can reach you from beyond it because, being
in God, *you* encompass everything. Believe this, and you *will* realize
how much is up to you. When anything threatens your peace of mind, ask
yourself,

^62^ Has God changed His Mind about me?

^63^ Then *accept* His decision, for it is indeed changeless, and refuse
to change your mind about *yourself*. God will never decide *against*
you, or He would be deciding against Himself.

^64^ The reason you do not know *your* creations is simply that you
would decide against them as long as your minds are split, and to attack
what you have created is impossible. But remember that it is *as
impossible for God*. The law of creation is that you love your creations
as yourself because they *are* part of you. Everything that was created
is therefore perfectly safe because the laws of God protect it by His
Love. Any part of your mind that does not know this has banished itself
from knowledge because it has not met its conditions.

^65^ Who could have done this but you? Recognize this gladly, for in
this recognition lies the realization that your banishment is *not* of
God and therefore does not exist. You are at home in God, dreaming of
exile but perfectly capable of awakening to reality. Is it your will to
do so? You know from your own experience that what you see in dreams you
think is real as long as you are asleep. Yet the instant you waken, you
*know* that everything that *seemed* to happen did not happen at all.
You do not think this mysterious, even though all the laws of what you
awakened *to* were violated while you slept. Is it not possible that you
merely shifted from one dream to another, without *really* wakening?

^66^ Would you bother to reconcile what happened in conflicting dreams,
or would you dismiss both together if you discovered that reality is in
accord with neither? You do not remember being awake. When you hear the
Holy Spirit, you merely feel better because loving seems *possible* to
you, but you do *not* remember yet that it once was so. And it is in
this remembering that you will know it can be so again. What is possible
has not yet been accomplished. Yet what has once been is so *now* if it
is eternal. When you remember, you will know what you remember *is*
eternal and therefore *is* now.

^67^ You will remember everything the instant you *desire* it wholly,
for if to desire wholly is to create, you will have willed away the
separation, returning your mind simultaneously to your Creator and your
creations. Knowing *them*, you will have no wish to sleep but only the
will to waken and be glad. Dreams will be impossible because you will
*want* only truth, and being at last your will, it will be yours.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Decision to Forget**](#part0004.html#level-74) {#part0014_split_008.html#h1-74 .level1a}

^68^ Unless you *know* something, you *cannot* dissociate it. Knowledge
therefore *precedes* dissociation, and dissociation is nothing more than
a *decision to forget*. What has been forgotten then appears to be
fearful, but *only* because the dissociation was an *attack* on truth.
You are fearful *because* you have forgotten. And you have *replaced*
your knowledge by an awareness of dreams because you are *afraid* of
your dissociation, *not* of what you have dissociated. Even in this
world's therapy, when dissociated material is *accepted*,it ceases to be
fearful, for the laws of mind always hold.

^69^ Yet to give up the dissociation of *reality* brings more than
merely lack of fear. In *this* decision lie joy and peace and the glory
of creation. Offer the Holy Spirit only your will to remember, for He
retains the knowledge of God and of yourself *for* you, waiting for your
acceptance. Give up gladly *everything* that would stand in the way of
your remembering, for God is in your memory, and His Voice will tell you
that you are part of Him when you are willing to remember Him and know
your own reality again. Let nothing in this world delay your remembering
of Him, for in this remembering is the knowledge of *yourself*.

^70^ To remember is merely to restore to your mind *what is already
there*. You do not *make* what you remember; you merely accept again
what has been made but was rejected. The ability to accept truth in this
world is the perceptual counterpart of creating in the Kingdom. God will
do His part if you will do yours, and *His* return in exchange for yours
is the exchange of knowledge *for* perception. *Nothing* is beyond His
Will for you. But signify your will to remember Him and behold! He will
give you everything but for the asking.

^71^ When you attack, you are denying *yourself*. You are specifically
teaching yourself that you are *not* what you are. Your denial of
reality precludes the *acceptance* of God's gift because you have
accepted something *else* in its place. If you understand that the
misuse of defenses always constitutes an attack on truth and truth is
God, you will realize why this is *always* fearful. If you further
recognize that you are *part* of God, you will understand why it is that
you always attack yourself *first*.

^71a^ \[*All* attack is self-attack. It cannot *be* anything else.
Arising from your *own* decision *not* to be what you *are, it is an
attack on your identification*. Attack is thus the way in which your
identification is lost because, when you attack, you *must* have
forgotten what you are. And if your reality is God's, when *you* attack
you are not remembering *Him*. This is not because He is gone, but
because you are willing *actively not to remember Him*.\]

^72^ If you realized the complete havoc this makes of your peace of
mind, you could not make such an insane decision. You make it only
because you still believe that it can *get* you something you *want*. It
follows, then, that you want something *other* than peace of mind, but
you have not considered what it must be. Yet the logical outcome of your
decision is perfectly clear if you will *look* at it. By deciding
*against* your reality, you have made yourself vigilant *against* God
and His Kingdom. And it is *this* vigilance that makes you afraid to
remember Him.

^73^ You have *not* attacked God, and you *do* love Him. Can you change
your reality? No one can will to destroy himself. When you think you are
attacking your self, it is a sure sign that you hate what you *think*
you are. And this, and *only* this, can *be* attacked by you. What you
*think* you are can be hateful, and what this strange image makes you do
can be very destructive. Yet the destruction is no more real than the
image, although those who make idols *do* worship them. The idols are
nothing, but their worshipers are the Sons of God in sickness.

^74^ God would have them released from their sickness and returned to
His Mind. He will not *limit* your power to help them because He has
*given* it to you. Do not be afraid of it because it is your salvation.
What Comforter can there be for the sick Children of God except His
power through *you*? Remember that it does not matter *where* in the
Sonship He is accepted. He is *always* accepted for all, and when *your*
mind receives Him, the remembrance of Him awakens throughout the
Sonship. Heal your brothers simply by accepting God *for* them.

^75^ Your minds are not separate, and God has only one channel for
healing because He has but one Son. His remaining communication link
with all His Children joins them together and them to Him. To be aware
of this is to heal them because it is the awareness that no one is
separate, and so no one is sick. To believe that a Son of God *can* be
sick is to believe that part of God can suffer. Love *cannot* suffer
because it cannot attack. The remembrance of love therefore brings
invulnerability with it.

^76^ Do not side with sickness in the presence of a Son of God even if
*he* believes in it, for *your* acceptance of God in him *acknowledges*
the love of God which he has forgotten. Your recognition of him as
*part* of God teaches him the truth about himself, which he is denying.
Would you *strengthen* his denial of God and thus lose sight of
*yourself*? Or would you remind him of his wholeness and remember your
Creator *with* him? To believe a Son of God is sick is to worship the
same idol he does. God created love, *not* idolatry. All forms of
idolatry are caricatures of creation, taught by sick minds which are too
divided to know that creation *shares* power and *never* usurps it.
Sickness is idolatry because it is the belief that power can be taken
*from* you. Yet this is impossible because you are part of God, Who *is*
all power.

^77^ A sick god *must* be an idol, made in the image of what its maker
thinks *he* is. And that is exactly what the ego *does* perceive in a
Son of God; a sick god, self-created, self-sufficient, very vicious, and
very vulnerable. Is *this* the idol you would worship? Is *this* the
image you would be vigilant to *save*? \[Are you *really* afraid of
losing *this*?\] Look calmly at the logical conclusion of the ego's
thought system and judge whether its offering is really what you want,
for this *is* what it offers you. To *obtain* this you are willing to
attack the divinity of your brothers and thus lose sight of *yours*. And
you are willing to keep it hidden and to protect this idol, which you
think will save you from the dangers which the idol itself *stands for*,
but which do not exist.

^78^ There are no idolaters in the Kingdom, but there is great
appreciation for every Soul which God created because of the calm
knowledge that each one is part of Him. God's Son knows no idols, but he
*does* know his Father. Health in this world is the counterpart of value
in Heaven. It is not my merit that I contribute to you but my love, for
you do not value yourselves. When you do not value yourself, you become
sick, but *my* value of you can heal you because the value of God's Son
is one. When I said, "My peace I give unto you," I meant it. Peace came
from God through me to *you*. It was for you, although you did not ask.

^79^ When a brother is sick, it is because he is *not* asking for peace
and therefore does not know he *has* it. The *acceptance* of peace is
the denial of illusion, and sickness *is* an illusion. Yet every Son of
God has the power to deny illusions *anywhere* in the Kingdom merely by
denying them completely in himself. I can heal you because I know you. I
know your value *for* you, and it is this value that makes you whole. A
whole mind is not idolatrous and does not know of conflicting laws. I
will heal you merely because I have only *one* message, and it is true.
Your faith in it will make you whole when you have faith in me.

^80^ I do not bring God's message with deception, and you will learn
this as you learn that you always receive as much as you *accept*. You
could accept peace *now* for everyone you meet and offer them perfect
freedom from *all* illusions because *you* heard. But have no other gods
before Him, or you will *not* hear. God is not jealous of the gods you
make, but *you* are. You would save them and serve them because you
believe that they made *you.* You think they are your father because you
are projecting onto them the fearful fact that *you* made them to
*replace* God. Yet when they seem to speak to you, remember that nothing
*can* replace God, and whatever replacements you have attempted *are*
nothing.

^81^ Very simply, then, you may *believe* you are afraid of nothingness,
but you are really afraid of *nothing*. And in *that* awareness you are
healed. You *will* hear the god you listen to. You *made* the god of
sickness, and *by* making him, you made yourself able to hear him. Yet
you did not create him because he is *not* the Will of the Father. He is
therefore not eternal and will be *unmade* for you the instant you
signify your willingness to accept *only* the eternal. If God has but
one Son, there is but one God. You share reality with Him because
reality is not divided. To accept other gods before Him is to place
other images before *yourself.*

^82^ You do not realize how much you listen to your gods and how
vigilant you are on their behalf. Yet they exist only *because* you
honor them. Place honor where it is due, and peace will be yours. It is
your inheritance from your *real* Father. You cannot make your father,
and the father you made did not make you. Honor is not due to illusions,
for to honor them is to honor nothing. Yet fear is not due them either,
for nothing cannot be fearful. You have chosen to fear love *because* of
its perfect harmlessness, and because of this fear, you have been
willing to give up your own perfect helpfulness and your own perfect
Help.

^83^ Only at the altar of God will you find peace. And this altar is in
you because God put it there. His Voice still calls you to return, and
He will be heard when you place no other gods before Him. You can give
up the god of sickness for your brothers; in fact, you would *have* to
do so if you give him up for yourself. For if you see him anywhere, you
have accepted him. And if you accept him, you *will* bow down and
worship him because he was made as God's replacement. He is the belief
that you can *choose* which god is real. Although it is perfectly clear
that this has nothing to do with reality, it is equally clear that it
has *everything* to do with reality as you perceive it.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. Magic versus Miracles**](#part0004.html#level-75) {#part0014_split_009.html#h1-75 .level1a}

^84^ *All* magic is a form of reconciling the irreconcilable. All
religion is the recognition that the irreconcilable cannot *be*
reconciled. Sickness and perfection *are* irreconcilable. If God created
you perfect, you *are* perfect. If you believe you can be sick, you have
placed other gods before Him. God is not at war with the god of sickness
you made, but *you* are. He is the symbol of willing *against* God, and
you are afraid of him *because* he cannot be reconciled with God's Will.
If you attack him, you will make him real to you. But if you refuse to
worship him in whatever form he may appear to you and wherever you think
you see him, he will disappear into the nothingness out of which he was
made.

^85^ Reality can dawn only on an unclouded mind. It is always there to
be accepted, but its acceptance depends on your willingness to *have*
it. To know reality must involve the willingness to judge *unreality*
for what it is. This is the *right* use of selective perception. To
overlook nothingness is merely to judge it correctly, and because of
your ability to evaluate it truly, *to let it go*. Knowledge cannot dawn
on a mind full of illusions because truth and illusions are
irreconcilable. Truth is whole and *cannot* be known by part of a mind.

^86^ The Sonship cannot be perceived as *partly* sick because to
perceive it that way is not to perceive it at all. If the Sonship is
one, it is one in *all* respects. Oneness *cannot* be divided. If you
perceive other gods, your mind is split, and you will not be able to
*limit* the split because the split *is* the sign that you have removed
part of your mind from God's Will, and this means it is out of control.
To be out of control is to be out of *reason*, and the mind *does*
become unreasonable without reason. This is merely a matter of
definition. By *defining* the mind wrongly, you perceive it
as*functioning* wrongly.

^87^ God's laws will keep your minds at peace because peace is His Will,
and His laws are established to uphold it. His are the laws of freedom,
but yours are the laws of bondage. Since freedom and bondage are
irreconcilable, their laws cannot *be* understood together. The laws of
God work only for your good, and there *are* no other laws beside His.
Everything else is merely lawless and therefore chaotic. Yet God Himself
has protected everything He created *by* His laws. Therefore, everything
that is not under them does not exist. "Laws of chaos" are meaningless
by definition. Creation is perfectly lawful, and the chaotic is without
meaning because it is without *God*. You have given your peace to the
gods you made, but they are not there to take it from you, and you are
not able to give it to them.

^88^ You are *not* free to give up freedom, but only to *deny* it. You
*cannot* do what God did not intend because what He did not intend *does
not happen*. Your gods do not *bring* chaos; you are *endowing* them
with chaos and accepting it of them. All this has never been. Nothing
but the laws of God has ever operated, and nothing except His Will will
ever be. You were created through His laws and by His Will, and the
manner of your creation established you *as* creators. What you have
made is so unworthy of you that you could hardly want it if you were
willing to see it *as it is*. You will see nothing at all. And your
vision will automatically look beyond it to what is in you and all
around you. Reality cannot break through the obstructions you interpose,
but it *will* envelop you completely when you let them go.

^89^ When you have experienced the protection of God, the making of
idols becomes inconceivable. There are no strange images in the Mind of
God, and what is not in His Mind cannot be in yours because you are of
*One* Mind and that Mind belongs to *Him*. It is yours *because* it
belongs to Him, for ownership is sharing to Him. And if it is so for
Him, it is so for you. His definitions *are* His laws, for by them He
established the universe as what it is. No false gods you attempt to
interpose between yourself and your reality affect truth at all. Peace
is yours because God created you. And He created nothing else.

^90^ The miracle is the act of a Son of God who has laid aside all false
gods and who calls on his brothers to do likewise. It is an act of faith
because it is the recognition that his brother can do it. It is a call
to the Holy Spirit in his mind, a call to Him which is strengthened by
this joining. Because the miracle worker has heard Him, he strengthens
His Voice in a sick brother by weakening his *belief* in sickness, which
he does *not* share. The power of one mind *can* shine into another
because all the lamps of God were lit by the same spark. It is
everywhere, and it is eternal.

^91^ In many only the spark remains, for the Great Rays are obscured.
Yet God has kept the spark alive so that the rays can never be
completely forgotten. If you but see the little spark, you will learn of
the greater light, for the rays are there unseen. Perceiving the spark
will heal, but knowing the light will create. Yet in the returning, the
little light must be acknowledged first, for the separation was a
descent from magnitude to littleness. But the spark is still as pure as
the great light because it is the remaining call of creation. Put all
your faith in it, and God Himself will answer you.
:::

[]{#part0014_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The Denial of God**](#part0004.html#level-76) {#part0014_split_010.html#h1-76 .level1a}

^92^ The rituals of the god of sickness are strange and very demanding.
Joy is never permitted, for depression is the sign of allegiance to him.
Depression means that you have foresworn God. Men are afraid of
blasphemy, but they do not know what it means. They do not realize that
to deny God is to deny their *own* identity, and in this sense the wages
of sin *is* death. The sense is very literal; denial of life perceives
its opposite, as *all* forms of denial replace what *is* with what is
*not*. No one can really do this, but that you can *think* you can and
believe you *have* is beyond dispute.

^93^ Do not forget, however, that to deny God will inevitably result in
projection, and you will believe that others, *and not yourself*, have
done this to you. You will receive the message you give because it is
the message you *want*. You may believe that you judge your brothers by
the messages they give *you*, but *you* have judged *them* by the
message you give to *them*. Do not attribute your denial of joy to them,
or you cannot see the spark in them that could bring joy to *you*. It is
the *denial* of the spark that brings depression, and whenever you see
your brothers *without* it, you *are* denying God.

^94^ Allegiance to the denial of God is the ego's religion. The god of
sickness obviously demands the denial of health, because health is in
direct opposition to its own survival. But consider what this means to
*you*. Unless you are sick, you cannot keep the gods you made, for only
in sickness could you possibly *want* them. Blasphemy, then, is
*self*-destructive, *not* God-destructive. It means that you are willing
*not* to know yourself *in order* to be sick. This is the offering which
your god demands because, having made him out of *your* insanity, he is
an insane idea. He has many forms, but although he may seem like many
different things, he is but one idea---the denial of God.

^95^ Sickness and death entered the mind of God's Son *against* His
Will. The "attack on God" made His Son think he was fatherless, and out
of his depression, he made the god of depression. This was his
alternative to joy, because he would not accept the fact that, although
he was a creator, he had been created. Yet the Son *is* helpless without
the Father, Who alone is his help. We said before that of yourselves you
can do nothing, but you are not *of* yourselves. If you were, what you
have made would be true, and you could *never* escape.

^96^ It is *because* you did not make yourselves that you need be
troubled by nothing. Your gods are nothing because your Father did not
create them. You cannot make creators who are unlike your Creator any
more than He could have created a Son who was unlike Him. If creation is
sharing, it cannot create what is unlike itself. It can share only what
it *is*. Depression is isolation, and so it could not have *been*
created.

^97^ Son of God, you have not sinned, but you *have* been much mistaken.
Yet this can be corrected, and God will help you, *knowing* that you
could not sin against Him. You denied Him *because* you loved Him,
knowing that if you *recognized* your love for Him, you *could* not deny
Him. Your denial of Him therefore means that you love Him and that you
know *He* loves *you*. Remember that what you deny, you *must* have
known. And if you accept denial, you can accept its *undoing*.

^98^ Your Father has not denied you. He does not retaliate, but He
*does* call to you to return. When you think He has not answered your
call, *you* have not answered *His*. He calls to you from every part of
the Sonship because of His love for His Son. If you *hear* His message,
He has answered you, and you will learn of Him if you hear aright. The
love of God is in everything He created, for His Son is everywhere. Look
with peace upon your brothers, and God will come rushing into your heart
in gratitude for your gift to Him.

^99^ Do not look to the god of sickness for healing but only to the God
of love, for healing is the *acknowledgment* of Him. When you
acknowledge Him, you will *know* that He has never ceased to acknowledge
*you* and that in His acknowledgment of you lies your Being. You are not
sick, and you cannot die. But you *can* confuse yourself with things
that do. Remember, though, that to do this *is* blasphemy, for it means
that you are looking without love on God and His creation, from which He
cannot *be* separated. Only the eternal can be loved, for love does not
die. What is of God is His forever, and you *are* of God. Would He allow
Himself to suffer? And would He offer His Son anything that is not
acceptable to Him?

^100^ If you will accept yourself as God created you, you will be
incapable of suffering. Yet to do this, you must acknowledge Him as your
Creator. This is not because you will be punished otherwise. It is
merely because your acknowledgment of your Father *is* the
acknowledgment of yourself as you are. Your Father created you wholly
without sin, wholly without pain, and wholly without suffering of any
kind. If you deny Him, you bring sin, pain, and suffering into your
*own* mind because of the power He gave it. Your mind is capable of
creating worlds, but it can also deny what it creates because it is
free.

^101^ You do not realize how much you have denied yourself, and how much
God in His love would not have it so. Yet He would not interfere with
you because He would not know His Son if he were not free. To interfere
with you would be to attack Himself, and God is not insane. When you
denied Him, *you* were insane. Would you have Him *share* your insanity?
God will never cease to love His Son, and His Son will never cease to
love Him. That was the condition of His Son's creation, fixed forever in
the Mind of God. To know that is sanity. To deny it is insanity. God
gave Himself to you in your creation, and His gifts are eternal. Would
you deny yourself to Him?

^102^ Out of your gifts to Him, the Kingdom will be restored to His Son.
His Son removed himself *from* His gift by refusing to accept what had
been created for him and what he himself had created in the Name of his
Father. Heaven waits for his return, for it was created as the dwelling
place of God's Son. You are not at home anywhere else or in any other
condition. Do not deny yourself the joy which was created for you for
the misery you have made for yourselves. God has given you the means for
undoing what you have made. Listen and you *will* learn what you are.

^103^ If God knows His Children as wholly sinless, it is blasphemous to
perceive them as guilty. If God knows His Children as wholly without
pain, it is blasphemous to perceive suffering anywhere. If God knows His
Children to be wholly joyous, it is blasphemous to feel depressed. All
of these illusions and the many other forms which blasphemy may take are
*refusals* to accept creation as it is. If God created His Son perfect,
that is how you must learn to see him to learn of his reality. And as
*part* of the Sonship, that is how you must see *yourself* to learn of
*yours*.

^104^ Do not perceive *anything* God did not create, or you are denying
*Him*. His is the *only* Fatherhood, and it is yours only because *He*
has given it to you. Your gifts to yourself are meaningless, but your
gifts to *your* creations are like His because they are given in His
Name. That is why your creations are as real as His. Yet the real
Fatherhood must be acknowledged if the real Son is to be known. You
believe that the sick things which you have made are your real creations
because you believe that the sick images you perceive *are* the Sons of
God.

^105^ Only if you accept the Fatherhood of God will you have *anything*
because His fatherhood *gave* you everything. That is why to deny Him
*is* to deny yourself. Arrogance is the denial of love because love
*shares* and arrogance *withholds*. As long as both appear to you to be
desirable, the concept of choice, which is *not* of God, will remain
with you. While this is not true in eternity, it *is* true in time, so
that while time lasts in *your* minds, there *will* be choices. Time
*itself* was your choice.

^106^ If you would remember eternity, you must learn to look *only* on
the eternal. If you allow yourselves to become preoccupied with the
temporal, you *are* living in time. As always, your choice is determined
by what you value. Time and eternity cannot both be real because they
contradict each other. If you will accept only what is timeless as real,
you will begin to understand eternity and make it yours.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Ten**](#part0004.html#chap-10) {#part0015_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**God and the Ego**](#part0004.html#chap-10) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-77) {#part0015_split_000.html#h1-77 .level1a1}

^10:1^ Either God or the ego is insane. If you will examine the evidence
on both sides fairly, you will realize that this must be true. Neither
God nor the ego proposes a partial thought system. Each is internally
consistent, but they are diametrically opposed in all respects so that
partial allegiance is impossible. Remember, too, that their results are
as different as their foundations, and their fundamentally
irreconcilable natures *cannot* be reconciled by your vacillations.
Nothing alive is fatherless, for life is creation. Therefore, your
decision is always an answer to the question, "Who is my father?" And
you will be faithful to the father you choose.

^2^ Yet what would you say to someone who really believed this question
involves conflict? If *you* made the ego, how can the ego have made you?
The authority problem remains the only source of perceived conflict
because the ego was made out of the wish of God's Son to father Him. The
ego, then, is nothing more than a delusional system in which you made
your own father. Make no mistake about this. It sounds insane when it is
stated with perfect honesty, but the ego never looks upon what it does
with perfect honesty. Yet that *is* its insane premise, which is
carefully hidden in the dark cornerstone of its thought system. And
either the ego, which you made, *is your father, or its whole thought
system will not stand.*
:::

[]{#part0015_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Projection versus Extension**](#part0004.html#level-78) {#part0015_split_001.html#h1-78 .level1a}

^3^ You have made by projection, but God has created by extension. The
cornerstone of God's creation is you, for His thought system is light.
Remember the rays that are there unseen. The more you approach the
center of His thought system, the clearer the light becomes. The closer
you come to \[the foundation of\] the ego's thought system, the darker
and more obscure becomes the way. Yet even the little spark in your mind
is enough to lighten it. Bring this light fearlessly with you and hold
it up to the foundation of the ego's thought system bravely. Be willing
to judge it with perfect honesty. Open the dark cornerstone of terror on
which it rests and bring it out into the light. There you will see that
it rests on meaninglessness and that everything of which you have been
afraid was based on nothing.

^4^ My brother, you are part of God and part of me. When you have at
last looked at the ego's foundation without shrinking, you will also
have looked upon *ours*. I come to you from our Father to offer you
everything again. Do not refuse it in order to keep a dark cornerstone
hidden, for *its* protection will not save you. I *give* you the lamp
and I will go *with* you. You will not take this journey alone. I will
lead you to your true Father, who hath need of you as I have. Will you
not answer the call of love with joy?

^5^ You have learned your need of healing. Would you bring anything else
to the Sonship, recognizing your need of healing for yourself? For in
this lies the beginning of knowledge, the foundation on which God will
help you build again the thought system which you share with Him. Not
one stone you place upon it but will be blessed by Him, for you will be
restoring the holy dwelling place of His Son, where He wills His Son to
be and where he is. In whatever part of the mind of God's Son you
restore this reality, you restore it to yourself. For you dwell in the
Mind of God with your brother, for God Himself did not will to be alone.

^6^ To be alone is to be separated from infinity, but how can this be if
infinity has no end? No one can be *beyond* the limitless because what
has no limits must be everywhere. There are no beginnings and no endings
in God, Whose universe is Himself. Can you exclude yourself from the
universe or from God, Who *is* the universe? I and my Father are one
with *you*, for you are part of *us*. Do you really believe that part of
God can be missing or lost to Him.

^7^ If you were not part of God, His Will would not be unified. Is this
conceivable? Can part of His Mind contain nothing? If your place in His
Mind cannot be filled by anyone *except* you, and your filling it *was*
your creation, *without* you there would be an empty place in God's
Mind. Extension cannot be blocked, and it *has* no voids. It continues
forever, however much it is denied. Your denial of its reality arrests
it in time but *not* in eternity. That is why your creations have not
ceased to be extended and why so much is waiting for your return.

^8^ Waiting is possible *only* in time, but time has no meaning. You who
made delay can leave time behind simply by recognizing that neither
beginnings nor endings were created by the Eternal, Who placed no limits
on His creation nor upon those who create like Him. You do not know this
simply because you have tried to limit what *He* created, and so you
believe that *all* creation is limited. How, then, could you know your
creations, having *denied* infinity? The laws of the universe do not
permit contradiction. What holds for God holds for *you*. If you believe
*you* are absent from God, you *will* believe that He is absent from
*you*.

^9^ Infinity is meaningless *without* you, and *you* are meaningless
without God. There *is* no end to God and His Son, for we *are* the
universe. God is not incomplete, and He is not childless. Because He did
not will to be alone, He created a Son like Himself. Do not deny Him His
Son, for your unwillingness to accept His Fatherhood has denied you
*yours*. See His creations as *His* Son, for yours were created in honor
of Him. The universe of love does not stop because you do not see it,
and your closed eyes have not lost the ability to see. Look upon the
glory of His creation, and you will learn what God has *kept* for you.

^10^ God has given you a place in His Mind which is yours forever. Yet
you could keep it only by *giving* it, as it was given *you*. Could
*you* be alone there if it was given you because God did not will to be
alone? God's Mind cannot *be* lessened. It can *only* be increased, and
everything He creates has the function of creating. Love does not limit,
and what it creates is not limited. To give without limit is God's Will
for you because only this can bring you the joy which is His and which
He wills to *share* with you. Your love is as boundless as His because
it *is* His.

^11^ Could any part of God be *without* His love and could any part of
His love be contained? God is your heritage because His one gift is
Himself. How can you give except like Him if you would know His gift to
*you*? Give, then, without limit and without end to learn how much *He*
has given *you*. Your ability to *accept* Him depends on your
willingness to give as He gives. Your fatherhood and your Father *are*
one. God willed to create, and your will is His. It follows, then, that
*you* will to create since your will follows from His. And being an
extension of His Will, yours must be the same.

^12^ Yet what you will you do not know. This is not strange when you
realize that to deny is to "*not* know." God's Will is that you are His
Son. By denying this, you denied your *own* will and therefore do *not*
know what it is. The reason you must ask what God's Will is in
everything is merely because it *is* yours. You do not know what it is,
but the Holy Spirit remembers it *for* you. Ask Him, therefore, what
God's Will is for you, and He will tell you *yours*. It cannot be too
often repeated that you do *not* know it. Whenever what the Holy Spirit
tells you appears to be coercive, it is only because you do not
*recognize* your own will.

^13^ The projection of the ego makes it appear as if God's Will is
*outside* yourself and therefore *not* yours. In this interpretation, it
*is* possible for God's Will and yours to conflict. God then may *seem*
to demand of you what you do not want to give and thus deprive you of
what you want. Would God, who wants *only* your will, be capable of
this? Your will is His Life, which He has given to you. Even in time you
cannot live apart from Him, for sleep is not death. What He created can
sleep, but it *cannot* die. Immortality is His Will for His Son and His
Son's will for *himself*. God's Son cannot will death for himself
because His Father is Life and His Son is like Him. Creation is your
will *because* it is His.

^14^ You cannot be happy unless you do what you will truly, and you
cannot change this because it is immutable. It is immutable by God's
Will *and yours*, for otherwise His Will would not have been extended.
You are afraid to know God's Will because you believe it is *not* yours.
This belief is your whole sickness and your whole fear. Every symptom of
sickness and fear arises here because this is the belief that makes you
*want* not to know. Believing this, you hide in darkness, denying that
the light is in you.

^15^ You are asked to trust the Holy Spirit only because He speaks for
*you*. He is the Voice for God, but never forget that God did not will
to be alone. He *shares* His Will with you; He does not thrust it *upon*
you. Always remember that what He gives, He holds, so that nothing He
gives can contradict Him. You who share His Life must share it to know
it, for sharing *is* knowing. Blessed are you who learn that to hear the
Will of your Father is to know your *own*. For it is *your* will to be
like Him, Whose Will it is that it be so. God's Will is that His Son be
one, and united with Him in His Oneness. That is why healing is the
beginning of the recognition that your will *is* His.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Willingness for Healing**](#part0004.html#level-79) {#part0015_split_002.html#h1-79 .level1a}

^16^ If sickness is separation, the will to heal and be healed is the
first step toward *recognizing* what you truly want. Every attack is a
step away from this, and every healing thought brings it closer. The Son
of God *has* both Father and Son because he *is* both Father and Son. To
unite having and being is only to unite your will with His, for He wills
you Himself. And you will yourself to Him because, in your perfect
understanding of Him, you *know* there is but One Will. Yet when you
attack any part of God and His Kingdom, your understanding is not
perfect, and what you will is therefore lost to you.

^17^ Healing thus becomes a lesson in *understanding*, and the more you
practice it, the better teacher *and* learner you become. If you have
denied truth, what better witnesses to its reality could you have than
those who have been healed by it? But be sure to count yourself among
them, for in your willingness to join them is *your* healing
accomplished. Every miracle which you accomplish speaks to you of the
Fatherhood of God. Every healing thought which you accept, either from
your brother or in your own mind, teaches you that you are God's Son. In
every hurtful thought you hold, wherever you perceive it, lies the
denial of God's Fatherhood and your Sonship.

^18^ And denial is as total as love. You cannot deny part of yourself
because the remainder will seem to be unintegrated and therefore without
meaning. And being without meaning to you, you will not understand it.
To deny meaning *must* be to fail to understand. You can heal only
yourself, for only God's Son *needs* healing. He needs it because he
does not understand himself and therefore knows not what he does. Having
forgotten his will, he does not know what he wants.

^19^ Healing is a sign that he wants *to make whole*. And this
willingness opens his *own* ears to the Voice of the Holy Spirit, whose
message *is* wholeness. He will enable you to go far beyond the healing
*you* would undertake, for beside your small willingness to make whole,
He will lay His own *complete* Will and make *yours* whole. What can the
Son of God *not* accomplish with the Fatherhood of God in him? And yet
the invitation must come from you, for you have surely learned that whom
you invite as your guest *will* abide with you.

^20^ The Holy Spirit cannot speak to an unwelcoming host because He will
*not be heard*. The Eternal Guest remains, but His Voice grows faint in
alien company. He needs your protection, but only because your care is a
sign that you *want* Him. Think like Him ever so slightly, and the
little spark becomes a blazing light that fills your mind so that He
becomes your *only* Guest. Whenever you ask the ego to enter, you lessen
His welcome. He will remain, but *you* have allied yourself *against*
Him. Whatever journey you choose to take, He will go with you, waiting.
You can safely trust His patience, for He cannot leave a part of God.
Yet you need far more than patience.

^21^ You will never rest until you know your function *and fulfill it*,
for only in this can your will and your Father's be wholly joined. To
*have* Him is to be *like* Him, and He has given Himself to you. You who
have God *must* be as God, for *His* function became *yours* with His
gift. Invite this knowledge back into your minds, and let nothing that
will obscure it enter. The Guest whom God sent you will teach you how to
do this if you but recognize the little spark and are willing to *let it
grow. Your* willingness need not be perfect because His *is*. If you
will merely offer Him a little place, He will lighten it so much that
you will gladly extend it. And by*this* extending, you will begin to
remember creation.

^22^ Would you be hostage to the ego or host to God? You will accept
only whom *you* invite. You are free to determine who shall be your
guest and how long he shall remain with you. Yet this is not *real*
freedom, for it still depends on how you see it. The Holy Spirit is
*there*, although He cannot help you without your invitation, and the
ego is nothing whether you invite it in or not. Real freedom depends on
welcoming *reality*, and of your guests, only He is real. Know, then,
who abides with you merely by recognizing what is there *already* and do
not be satisfied with imaginary comforters, for the Comforter of God is
in you.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. From Darkness to Light**](#part0004.html#level-80) {#part0015_split_003.html#h1-80 .level1a}

^23^ When you are weary, remember you have hurt yourself. Your Comforter
will rest you, but *you* cannot. You do not know *how*, for if you did
you could never have grown weary. Unless you have hurt yourselves, you
could never suffer in *any* way, for that is not God's Will for His Son.
Pain is not of Him, for He knows no attack and His peace surrounds you
silently. God is very quiet, for there is no conflict in Him. Conflict
is the root of all evil, for being blind, it does not see whom it
attacks. Yet it *always* attacks the Son of God, and the Son of God is
*you*.

^24^ God's Son is indeed in need of comfort, for he knows not what he
does, believing his will is not his own. The Kingdom is his, and yet he
wanders homelessly. At home in God, he is lonely, and amid all his
brothers, he is friendless. Would God *let* this be real if He did not
will to be alone Himself? And if your will is His, it cannot be true of
you *because* it is not true of Him. Oh, my children, if you knew what
God wills for you, your joy would be complete! And what He wills *has*
happened, for it was *always* true.

^25^ When the light comes and you have said, "God's Will is mine," you
will see such beauty that you will *know* it is not of you. Out of your
joy you will create beauty in His name, for *your* joy could no more be
contained than His. The bleak little world will vanish into nothingness,
and your heart will be so filled with joy that it will leap into Heaven
and into the Presence of God. I cannot tell you what this will be like,
for your hearts are not ready. Yet I *can* tell you and remind you often
that what God wills for Himself He wills for *you*, and what He wills
for you *is* yours.

^26^ The way is not hard, but it *is* very different. Yours is the way
of pain, of which God knows nothing. *That* way is hard indeed and very
lonely. Fear and grief are your guests, and they go with you and abide
with you on the way. But the dark journey is not the way of God's Son.
Walk in light, and do not see the dark companions, for they are not fit
companions for the Son of God, who was created *of* light and *in*
light. The Great Light always surrounds you and shines out *from* you.
How can you see the dark companions in a light such as this? If you see
*them*, it is only because you are *denying* the light. But deny *them*
instead, for the light is here, and the way is clear.

^27^ God hides nothing from His Son, even though His Son would hide
himself. Yet the Son of God cannot hide his glory, for God wills him to
be glorious and gave him the light that shines in him. You will never
lose your way, for God leads you. When you wander, you but undertake a
journey which is not real. The dark companions, the dark way, are all
illusions. Turn toward the light, for the little spark in you is part of
a light so great that it can sweep you out of all darkness forever. For
your Father *is* your Creator, and you *are* like Him.

^28^ The children of light cannot abide in darkness, for darkness is not
in them. Do not be deceived by the dark comforters, and never let them
enter the mind of God's Son, for they have no place in His temple. When
you are tempted to deny Him, remember that there *are* no other gods
that you can place before Him, and accept His Will for you in peace. For
you *cannot* accept it otherwise.

^29^ Only God's Comforter *can* comfort you. In the quiet of His temple,
He waits to give you the peace that is yours. *Give* His peace that you
may enter the temple and find it waiting for you. But be holy in the
Presence of God, or you will not know that you are there. For what is
unlike God cannot enter His Mind because it was not His Thought and
therefore does not belong to Him. And *your* minds must be as pure as
His if you would know what belongs to *you*. Guard carefully His temple,
for He Himself dwells there and abides in peace. You cannot enter God's
Presence with the dark companions beside you, but you also cannot enter
alone.

^30^ *All* your brothers must enter *with* you, for until you have
accepted them, *you* cannot enter. For you cannot understand Wholeness
unless *you* are whole, and no part of the Son can be excluded if he
would know the Wholeness of his Father. In your mind, you can accept the
whole Sonship and bless it with the light your Father gave it. Then you
will be worthy to dwell in the temple *with* Him because it is *your*
will not to be alone. God blessed His Son forever. If you will bless him
in time, you will *be* in eternity. Time cannot separate you from God if
you use it on *behalf* of the eternal.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Inheritance of God's Son**](#part0004.html#level-81) {#part0015_split_004.html#h1-81 .level1a}

^31^ Never forget that the Sonship is your salvation, for the Sonship is
your Soul. As God's creation, it is yours, and belonging to you, it is
His. Your Soul does not need salvation, but your mind needs to learn
what salvation *is*. You are not saved *from* anything, but you are
saved *for* glory. Glory is your inheritance, given your Soul by its
Creator that you might *extend* it. Yet if you hate part of your own
Soul, *all* your understanding is lost because you are looking on what
God created as *yourself* without love. And since what He created is
part of Him, you are denying Him His place in His own altar.

^32^ Could you try to make God homeless and know that *you* are at home?
Can the Son deny the Father *without* believing that the Father has
denied *him*? God's laws hold only for your protection, and they never
hold in vain. What you experience when you deny your Father is still for
your protection, for the power of your will cannot be lessened without
the intervention of God *against* it, and any limitation on your power
is not the Will of God. Therefore, look *only* to the power that God
gave to save you, remembering that it is yours *because* it is His, and
join with your brothers in His peace.

^33^ The peace of your Soul lies in its limitlessness. Limit the peace
you share, and your own Soul *must* be unknown to you. Every altar to
God is part of your Soul because the light He created is one with Him.
Would you cut off a brother from the light that is yours? You would not
do so if you realized that you can only darken your *own* mind. As you
bring *him* back, so will *your* mind return. That is the law of God for
the protection of the wholeness of His Son.

^34^ *Only you can deprive yourself of anything*. Do not oppose this
realization, for it is truly the beginning of the dawn of light.
Remember also that the denial of this simple fact takes many forms, and
these you must learn to recognize and to oppose steadfastly and *without
exception*. This is a crucial step in the reawakening. The beginning
phases of this reversal are often quite painful for, as blame is
withdrawn from without, there is a strong tendency to harbor within. It
is difficult at first to realize that this is *exactly* the same thing,
for there *is* no distinction between within and without.

^35^ If your brothers are part of you and you blame *them* for your
deprivation, you *are* blaming yourself. And you cannot blame yourself
*without* blaming them. That is why blame must be undone, *not*
re-allocated. Lay it to yourself and you cannot *know* yourself, for
*only* the ego blames at all. Self-blame is therefore ego identification
and as strong an ego defense as blaming others. *You cannot enter God's
Presence if you attack his Son*. When His Son lifts his voice in praise
of his Creator, he *will* hear the Voice of his Father. Yet the Creator
cannot be praised *without* His Son, for their glory is shared, and they
are glorified together.

^36^ Christ is at God's altar, waiting to welcome His Son. But come
wholly without condemnation, for otherwise you will believe that the
door is barred and you cannot enter. The door is *not* barred, and it is
impossible for you to be unable to enter the place where God would have
you be. But love yourself with the love of Christ, for so does your
Father love you. You can *refuse* to enter, but you *cannot* bar the
door which Christ holds open. Come unto me who holds it open *for* you,
for while I live it cannot be shut, and I live forever. God is my life
*and yours*, and nothing is denied by God to His Son.

^37^ At God's altar Christ waits for the restoration of Himself in
*you*. God knows His Son as wholly blameless as Himself, and He is
approached through the appreciation of His Son. Christ waits for your
acceptance of Him as *yourself* and of His wholeness as *yours*. For
Christ is the Son of God who lives in his Creator and shines with His
glory. Christ is the extension of the love and the loveliness of God, as
perfect as his Creator and at peace with Him.

^38^ Blessed is the Son of God, whose radiance is of his Father and
whose glory he wills to share as his Father shares it with him. There is
no condemnation in the Son, for there is no condemnation in the Father.
Sharing the perfect love of the Father, the Son must share what belongs
to Him, for otherwise he will not know the Father *or* the Son. Peace be
unto you who rest in God and in whom the whole Sonship rests.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Dynamics of the Ego**](#part0004.html#level-82) {#part0015_split_005.html#h1-82 .level1a}

^39^ No one can escape from illusions unless he looks at them, for *not*
looking is the way they are *protected*. There is no need to shrink from
illusions, for they cannot be dangerous. We are ready to look more
closely at the ego's thought system because together we have the lamp
that will dispel it, and since you realize you do not *want* it, *you*
must be ready. Let us be very calm in doing this, for we are merely
looking honestly for truth. The "dynamics" of the ego will be our lesson
for a while, for we must look first at this to look beyond it since you
*have* made it real. We will *undo* this error quietly together and then
look beyond it to truth.

^40^ What is healing but the removal of all that *stands in the way* of
knowledge? And how else can one dispel illusions *except* by looking at
them directly *without* protecting them? Be not afraid, therefore, for
what you will be looking at *is* the source of fear, but you have surely
learned by now that *fear* is not real. We have accepted the fact
already that its *effects* can be dispelled merely by denying their
reality. The next step is obviously to recognize that what has no
effects *does not exist*. Laws do not operate in a vacuum, and what
leads to nothing *has not happened*. If reality is recognized by its
*extension,* what extends to nothing cannot *be* real.

^41^ Do not be afraid, then, to look upon fear, for it cannot *be* seen.
Clarity undoes confusion by definition, and to look upon darkness
through light *must* dispel it. Let us begin this lesson in "ego
dynamics" by understanding that the term itself does not mean anything.
In fact, it contains exactly the contradiction in terms which *makes* it
meaningless. "Dynamics" implies the power to do something, and the whole
separation *fallacy* lies in the belief that the ego has the power to do
*anything*. The ego is fearful to you *because* you believe this. Yet
the truth is very simple:

^42^ All power is of God. What is not of Him has\
no power to do anything.

^43^ When we look at the ego, then, we are not considering dynamics but
delusions. We can surely regard a delusional system without fear, for it
cannot have any effects if its source is not true. Fear becomes more
obviously inappropriate if one recognizes the ego's *goal*, which is so
clearly senseless that any effort exerted on its behalf is *necessarily*
expended on nothing. The ego's goal is quite explicitly ego *autonomy*.
From the beginning, then, its *purpose* is to be separate, sufficient
unto itself, and independent of any power *except* its own. This is
*why* it is the symbol of separation.

^44^ Every idea has a purpose, and its purpose is always the natural
extension of what it *is*. Everything that stems from the ego is the
natural outcome of its central belief, and the way to undo its *results*
is merely to recognize that their *source* is not natural, being out of
accord with your *true* nature. We once said that to will contrary to
God is wishful thinking and not real willing. His Will is one because
the extension of His Will cannot be unlike itself. The real conflict you
experience, then, is between the ego's idle wishes and the Will of God,
which you share. Can this *be* a real conflict?

^45^ Yours is the independence of creation, *not* of autonomy. Your
whole creative function lies in your complete *dependence* on God, Whose
function He shares with *you*. By *His* willingness to share it, He
became as dependent on you as you are on *Him*. Do not ascribe the ego's
arrogance to Him, Who wills not to be independent of *you*. He has
*included* you in His Autonomy. Can *you* believe that autonomy is
meaningful *apart* from Him? The belief in *ego* autonomy is costing you
the knowledge of your dependence on God *in* which your freedom lies.
The ego sees *all* dependency as threatening and has twisted even your
longing for God into a means of establishing *itself*. But do not be
deceived by *its* interpretation of your conflict.

^46^ The ego *always* attacks on behalf of separation. Believing it has
the power to do this, it does nothing else because its goal of autonomy
*is* nothing else. The ego is totally confused about reality, but it
does *not* lose sight of its goal. It is much more vigilant than *you*
are because it is perfectly certain of its purpose. *You* are confused
because you do *not* know *yours*.

^47^ What you must learn to recognize is that the *last* thing the ego
wishes you to realize is that *you are afraid of it*. For if the ego
gives rise to fear, it is *diminishing* your independence and
*weakening* your power. Yet its one claim to your allegiance is that it
can *give* power to you. Without this belief, you would not listen to it
at all. How, then, can its existence continue if you realize that, *by*
accepting it, you *are* belittling yourself and *depriving* yourself of
power?

^48^ The ego can and does allow you to regard yourself as supercilious,
unbelieving, "light-hearted," distant, emotionally shallow, callous,
uninvolved, and even desperate, but *not really afraid. Minimizing* fear
but *not* its undoing is the ego's constant effort and is indeed the
skill at which it is very ingenious. How can it preach separation
*without* upholding it through fear, and would you listen to it if you
recognized this *is* what it is doing?

^49^ *Your* recognition that whatever seems to separate you from God is
*only* fear, regardless of the form it takes and quite apart from how
the *ego* wants you to experience it, is therefore the basic ego threat.
Its dream of autonomy is shaken to its foundation by this awareness. For
though you may countenance a false idea of independence, you will *not*
accept the cost of fear *if you recognize it*. Yet this *is* the cost,
and the ego *cannot* minimize it. For if you overlook love, you are
overlooking *yourself*, and you *must* fear unreality *because* you have
denied yourself. By believing that you have successfully *attacked*
truth, you are believing that attack has *power*. Very simply, then, you
have become afraid of *yourself*. And no one wills to learn what he
believes would destroy him.

^50^ If the ego's goal of autonomy could be accomplished, God's purpose
could be defeated, and this *is* impossible. Only by learning what fear
*is*, can you finally learn to distinguish the possible from the
impossible and the false from the true. According to the ego's teaching,
*its* goal can be accomplished, and God's purpose can *not*. According
to the Holy Spirit's teaching, *only* God's purpose is accomplishment,
and it is *already* accomplished.

^51^ God is as dependent on you as you are on Him because His autonomy
*encompasses* yours and is therefore incomplete *without* it. You can
only establish your autonomy by identifying *with* Him and fulfilling
your function *as it exists in truth*. The ego believes that to
accomplish *its* goal is happiness. But it is given *you* to know that
God's function *is* yours and happiness cannot be found apart from your
*joint* will. Recognize only that the ego's goal, which you have pursued
quite diligently, has only brought you *fear*, and it becomes difficult
to maintain that fear *is* happiness.

^52^ *Upheld* by fear, this *is* what the ego would have you believe.
Yet God's Son is not insane and *cannot* believe it. Let him but
*recognize* it, and he will *not* accept it. For only the insane would
choose fear *in* place of love, and only the insane could believe that
love can be gained by attack. But the sane know that only attack could
produce *fear*, from which the love of God completely protects them.

^53^ The ego analyzes; the Holy Spirit *accepts*. The appreciation of
wholeness comes *only* through acceptance, for to analyze means to
separate out. The attempt to understand totality by breaking it up is
clearly the characteristically contradictory approach of the ego to
everything. Never forget that the ego believes that power,
understanding, and *truth* lie in separation, and to *establish* this
belief it *must* attack. Unaware that the belief cannot *be* established
and obsessed with the conviction that separation *is* salvation, the ego
attacks everything it perceives by breaking it up into small and
disconnected parts without meaningful relationships and thus without
meaning. The ego will *always* substitute chaos for meaning, for if
separation is salvation, harmony is threat.

^54^ The ego's interpretation of the laws of perception are, and would
*have* to be, the exact opposite of the Holy Spirit's. The ego focuses
on *error* and overlooks *truth*. It makes real *every* mistake it
perceives, and with characteristically circular reasoning concludes
that, *because* of the mistake, consistent truth must be meaningless.
The next step, then, is obvious. If consistent truth is meaningless,
*inconsistency* must be true if truth has meaning. Holding error clearly
in mind and protecting what it has made real, the ego proceeds to the
next step in its thought system-that error is real, and *truth is
error*.

^55^ The ego makes no attempt to understand this, and it is clearly
*not* understandable, but the ego does make *every* attempt to
*demonstrate it*, and this it does constantly. Analyzing to attack
meaning, the ego *does* succeed in overlooking it and is left with a
series of fragmented perceptions which it unifies on behalf of *itself*.
This, then, becomes the universe it perceives. And it is this universe
which, in turn, becomes its demonstration of its own reality.

^56^ Do not underestimate the appeal of the ego's demonstrations to
those who would listen. Selective perception chooses its witnesses
carefully, and its witnesses *are* consistent. The case for insanity
*is* strong to the insane. For reasoning ends at its beginning, and no
thought system transcends its source. Yet reasoning without meaning
*cannot* demonstrate anything, and those who are convinced by it *must*
be deluded. Can the ego teach truly when it *overlooks* truth? Can it
perceive what it has *denied*? Its witnesses *do* attest to its denial
but hardly to what it has denied! The ego looks straight at the Father
and does not see Him, for it has denied His Son.

^57^ Would *you* remember the Father? Accept His Son, and you *will*
remember Him. Nothing can demonstrate that His Son is unworthy, for
nothing can prove that a lie is true. What you see of His Son through
the eyes of the ego is a demonstration that His Son does not exist, yet
where the Son is, the Father *must* be. Accept what God does *not* deny,
and *He* will demonstrate its truth. The witnesses for God stand in His
light and behold what *He* created. Their silence is the sign that they
have beheld God's Son, and in the Presence of Christ they need
demonstrate nothing, for Christ speaks to them of Himself and of His
Father. They are silent because Christ speaks to them, and it is His
words that *they* speak.

^58^ Every brother you meet becomes a witness for Christ or for the ego,
depending on what you perceive in him. Everyone convinces you of what
you *want* to perceive and of the reality of the kingdom you have chosen
for your vigilance. Everything you perceive is a witness to the thought
system you *want* to be true. Every brother has the power to release you
*if you will to be free*. You cannot accept false witness of *him*
unless you have evoked false witnesses *against* him. If *he* speaks not
of Christ to you, *you* spoke not of Christ to him. You hear but your
*own* voice, and if Christ speaks *through* you, *you* will hear Him.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Experience and Perception**](#part0004.html#level-83) {#part0015_split_006.html#h1-83 .level1a}

^59^ It is impossible not to believe what you see, but it is equally
impossible to see what you do *not* believe. Perceptions are built up on
the basis of experience, and experience leads to beliefs. It is not
until beliefs are fixed that perceptions stabilize. In effect, then,
what you believe, you *do* see. That is what I meant when I said,
"Blessed are ye who have not seen and still believe," for those who
believe in the resurrection *will* see it. The resurrection is the
complete triumph of Christ over the ego, not by attack but by
transcendence. For Christ *does* rise above the ego and all its works
and ascends to the Father and *His* Kingdom.

^60^ Would you join in the resurrection or the crucifixion? Would you
condemn your brothers or free them? Would you transcend *your* prison
and ascend to the Father? For these questions are all the same and are
answered together. There has been much confusion about what perception
means because the same word is used both for awareness and for the
*interpretation* of awareness. Yet you cannot *be* aware without
interpretation, and what you perceive *is* your interpretation. This
course is perfectly clear. You do not see it clearly because you are
interpreting *against* it and therefore do not *believe* it. And if
belief determines perception, you do *not* perceive what it means and
therefore do not *accept* it.

^61^ Yet different experiences lead to different beliefs, \[and with
them, different perceptions. For perceptions are learned with beliefs,\]
and experience teaches. I am leading you to a new kind of experience,
which you will become less and less willing to deny. Learning of Christ
is easy, for to perceive with Him involves no strain at all. *His*
perceptions are your *natural* awareness, and it is only distortions
which *you* introduce that tire you. Let the Christ in you interpret
*for* you, and do not try to limit what you see by narrow little beliefs
which are unworthy of God's Son. For until Christ comes into His own,
the Son of God *will* see himself as fatherless.

^62^ I am *your* resurrection and *your* life. You live in me because
you live in God. And everyone lives in *you*, as *you* live in everyone.
Can you, then, perceive unworthiness in a brother and *not* perceive it
in yourself? And can you perceive it in yourself and *not* perceive it
in God? Believe in the resurrection because it has *been* accomplished,
and it has been accomplished *in* you. This is as true now as it will
ever be, for the resurrection is the Will of God, which knows no time
and no exceptions. But make no exceptions yourself, or you will not
perceive what has been accomplished *for* you. For we ascend unto the
Father together, as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be,
for such is the nature of God's Son as His Father created him.

^63^ Do not underestimate the power of the devotion of God's Son nor the
power of the god he worships over him. For he places *himself* at the
altar of his god, whether it be the god he made or the God who created
him. That is why his slavery is as complete as his freedom, for he will
obey *only* the god he accepts. The god of the crucifixion demands that
he crucify and his worshipers obey. In his name they crucify
*themselves*, believing that the power of the Son of God is born of
sacrifice and pain. The God of the resurrection demands *nothing*, for
He does not will to take away. He does not require obedience, for
obedience implies submission. He would only have you learn your *own*
will and follow it, not in the spirit of sacrifice and submission, but
in the gladness of freedom.

^64^ Resurrection must compel your allegiance gladly because it is the
symbol of joy. Its whole compelling power lies in the fact that it
represents what *you* want to be. The freedom to leave behind everything
that hurts you and humbles you and frightens you cannot be thrust upon
you, but it *can* be offered you through the grace of God. And you can
*accept* it by His grace, for God *is* gracious to His Son, accepting
him without question as His own. Who, then, is *your* own? The Father
has given you all that is His, and He Himself is yours *with* them.
Guard them in their resurrection, for otherwise you will not awake in
God safely surrounded by what is yours forever.

^65^ You will not find peace until you have removed the nails from the
hands of God's Son and taken the last thorn from his forehead. The love
of God surrounds His Son, whom the god of the crucifixion condemns.
Teach not that I died in vain. Teach rather that I did *not* die by
demonstrating that I live *in you*. For the *undoing* of the crucifixion
of God's Son is the work of the redemption, in which everyone has a part
of equal value. God does not judge His blameless Son. Having given
*Himself* to him, how could it be otherwise?

^66^ You have nailed *yourself* to a cross and placed a crown of thorns
upon your *own* head. Yet you *cannot* crucify God's Son, for the Will
of God cannot die. His Son *has been* redeemed from his own crucifixion,
and you cannot assign to death whom God has given eternal life. The
dream of crucifixion still lies heavy on your eyes, but what you see in
dreams is not reality. While you perceive the Son of God as crucified,
you are asleep. And as long as you believe that *you* can crucify him,
you are only having nightmares. You who are beginning to wake are still
aware of dreams and have not yet forgotten them. The forgetting of
dreams and the awareness of Christ comes with the awakening of others to
*share* your redemption.

^67^ You will awaken to your *own* call, for the Call to awake is
*within* you. If I live in you, you *are* awake. Yet you must see the
works I do through you, or you will not perceive that I have done them
*unto* you. Do not set limits on what you believe I can do through you,
or you will not accept what I can do *for* you. For it is done
*already*, and unless you give all that you have received, you will not
know that your Redeemer liveth and that *you* have awakened *with* Him.
Redemption is recognized *only* by sharing it.

^68^ God's Son *is* saved. Bring only *this* awareness to the Sonship,
and you will have a part in the redemption as valuable as mine. For your
part must be *like* mine if you learn it of me. If you believe that
*yours* is limited, *you* are limiting *mine*. There is no order of
difficulty in miracles because all of God's Sons are of equal value, and
their equality is their oneness. The whole power of God is in every part
of Him, and nothing contradictory to His Will is either great or small.
What does not exist has *no* size and *no* measure. To God *all* things
are possible. And to Christ it is given to be *like* the Father.
:::

[]{#part0015_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Problem and the Answer**](#part0004.html#level-84) {#part0015_split_007.html#h1-84 .level1a}

^69^ The world as *you* perceive it cannot have been created by the
Father, for the world is *not* as you see it. God created *only* the
eternal, and everything you see is perishable. Therefore, there must be
another world which you do *not* see. The Bible speaks of a *new* Heaven
and a *new* earth, yet this cannot be literally true, for the eternal
are not *re*-created. To perceive *anew* is merely to perceive *again*,
implying that before, or in the interval, you were not perceiving *at
all*. What, then, is the world that that awaits your perception when you
*see* it?

^70^ Every loving thought that the Son of God ever had is eternal. Those
which his mind perceived in this world are the world's *only* reality.
They are still perceptions because he still believes that he is
separate. Yet they are eternal because they are loving. And being
loving, they are like the Father and therefore cannot die. The real
world can *actually be perceived*. All that is necessary is a
willingness to perceive nothing *else*. For if you perceive both good
*and* evil, you are accepting both the false *and* the true *and making
no distinction between them*.

^71^ The ego sees *some* good but never *only* good. That is why its
perceptions are so variable. It does not reject goodness entirely, for
that you could not accept, but it always adds something that is *not*
real to the real, *thus confusing illusion and reality*. For perceptions
cannot be partly true. If you believe in truth *and* illusion, you
cannot tell *which* is true. To establish your *personal* autonomy, you
tried to create unlike your Father, believing what you made to be
capable of *being* unlike Him. Yet everything in what you have made that
*is* true *is* like Him. Only this is the real world, and perceiving
*only* this will lead you to the real Heaven because it will make you
capable of *understanding* it.

^72^ The perception of goodness is not knowledge, but the denial of the
*opposite* of goodness enables you to perceive a condition in which
opposites do not exist. And this *is* the condition of knowledge.
*Without* this awareness, you have not met its conditions, and until you
do you will not know that it is yours already. You have made many ideas
which you have placed between yourselves and your Creator, and these
beliefs are the world as you perceive it. Truth is not absent here, but
it *is* obscure. You do not know the difference between what you have
made and what God created, and so you do not know the difference between
what you have made and what *you* have created.

^73^ To believe that you can perceive the real world is to believe that
you can know yourself. You can know God because it is His Will to *be*
known. The real world is all that the Holy Spirit has saved for you out
of what you have made, and to perceive only this is salvation because it
is the recognition that reality is *only* what is true.

^74^ This is a very simple course. Perhaps you do not feel that a course
which, in the end, teaches nothing more than that only reality is true
is necessary. *But do you believe it?* When you have perceived the real
world, you will recognize that you did *not* believe it. Yet the
swiftness with which your new and *only* real perception will be
translated into knowledge will leave you only an instant to realize that
this judgment is true.

^75^ And then everything you made will be forgotten, the good and bad,
the false and the true. For as Heaven and earth become one, even the
real world will vanish from your sight. The end of the world is not its
destruction, but its *translation* into Heaven. The re-interpretation of
the world is the transfer of *all* perception to knowledge. The Bible
tells you to become as little children. Little children recognize that
they do not understand what they perceive, and so they *ask* what it
means. Do not make the mistake of believing that *you* understand what
you perceive, for its meaning is lost to you. Yet the Holy Spirit has
saved its meaning *for* you, and if you will *let* Him interpret it for
you, He will restore what you have thrown away. As long as you think
*you* know its meaning, you will see no need to ask it of Him.

^76^ You do not know the meaning of *anything* you perceive. *Not one
thought you hold is wholly true*. The recognition of this is your firm
beginning. You are not misguided; you have accepted no guide at all.
Instruction in perception is your great need, for you understand
nothing. Recognize this but do not *accept* it, for understanding is
your inheritance. Perceptions are learned, and you are not without a
Teacher. Yet your willingness to learn of Him depends on your
willingness to question *everything* you have learned of yourself, for
you who have learned amiss should not be your own teachers.

^77^ No one can withhold truth except from himself. Yet God will not
refuse the answer He *gave* you. Ask, then, for what is yours but which
you did not make, and do not defend yourself *against* truth. *You* made
the problem which God has answered. Ask yourselves, therefore, but one
simple question---

^78^ Do I want the problem, or do I want the answer?

^79^ Decide for the answer and you will have it, for you will see it as
it is, and it is yours already.

^80^ You complain that this course is not sufficiently specific for you
to understand it and *use* it. Yet it has been *very* specific, and you
have *not* done what it specifically advocates. This is not a course in
the play of ideas, but in their *practical application*. Nothing could
be more specific than to be told very clearly that if you ask you *will*
receive. The Holy Spirit will answer *every* specific problem as long as
you believe that problems *are* specific. His answer is both many and
one, as long as you believe that the one *is* many. Realize that you are
*afraid* of His specificity for fear of what you think it will *demand*
of you. Yet only by asking will you learn that nothing that is of God
demands *anything* of you. God *gives*; He does *not* take.

^81^ You are refusing to ask because you believe that asking is
*taking*, and you do *not* perceive it as sharing. The Holy Spirit will
give you only what is yours and will take *nothing* in return. For what
is yours *is* everything, and you share it with God. This *is* its
reality. Would the Holy Spirit, Who wills only to *restore*, be capable
of misinterpreting the question you must ask to learn His answer?

^82^ You *have* heard the answer, but you have misunderstood the
*question*. You have believed that to ask for guidance of the Holy
Spirit is to ask for *deprivation*. Little Children of God, you do not
understand your Father. You believe in a world that takes because you
believe that you can *get* by taking. And *by* that perception, you have
lost sight of the real world. You are afraid of the world as *you* see
it, but the real world is still yours for the asking. Do not deny it to
yourself, for it can *only* free you. Nothing of God will enslave His
Son, whom He created free and whose freedom is protected by His Being.

^83^ Blessed are you who will ask the truth of God without fear, for
only thus can you learn that His answer *is* the release from fear.
Beautiful Child of God, you are asking only for what I promised you. Do
you believe I would deceive you? The Kingdom of Heaven *is* within you.
Believe that the truth is in me, for I *know* that it is in *you*. God's
Sons have nothing which they do not share. Ask for truth of any Son of
God, and you have asked it of me. No one of us but has the answer in
him, to give to anyone who asks it of him. Ask anything of God's Son and
His Father will answer you, for Christ is not deceived in His Father,
and His Father is not deceived in Him.

^84^ Do not, then, be deceived in your brother and see only his loving
thoughts as his reality, for by denying that *his* mind is split, you
will heal *yours*. Accept him as his Father accepts him and heal him
unto Christ, for Christ is his healing *and* yours. Christ is the Son of
God, who is in no way separate from His Father, whose *every* thought is
as loving as the Thought of His Father by which He was created. Be not
deceived in God's Son, for thereby you *must* be deceived in yourself.
And being deceived in yourself, you *are* deceived in your Father in
Whom no deceit is possible.

^85^ In the real world there is no sickness, for there is no separation
and no division. Only loving thoughts are recognized, and because no one
is *without* your help, the Help of God goes with *you* everywhere. As
you become willing to *accept* this Help by *asking* for it, you will
give it because you *want* it. Nothing will be beyond your healing power
because nothing will be denied your simple request. What problems will
not disappear in the presence of God's answer? Ask, then, to learn of
the reality of your brother because this is what you *will* perceive in
him, and you will see *your* beauty reflected in him.

^86^ Do not accept your brother's variable perception of himself, for
his split mind is yours, and you will not accept *your* healing without
his. For you share the real world as you share Heaven, and his healing
*is* yours. To love yourself is to *heal* yourself, and you cannot
perceive part of you as sick and achieve your *own* goal. Brother, we
heal together as we live together and love together. Be not deceived in
God's Son, for he is one with himself and one with his Father. Love him
who is beloved of His Father, and you will learn of the Father's Love
for *you*.

^87^ If you perceive offense in a brother, pluck the offense from your
mind, for you are offended by Christ and are deceived in Him. *Heal* in
Christ and be not offended by Him, for there *is* no offense in Him. If
what you perceive offends you, you are offended in *yourself* and are
condemning God's Son, whom God condemneth not. Let the Holy Spirit
remove *all* offense of God's Son against himself and perceive no one
but through His guidance, for He would save you from *all* condemnation.
Accept His healing power and use it for all He sends you, for He wills
to heal the Son of God in whom He is not deceived.

^88^ Children perceive terrifying ghosts and monsters and dragons, and
they are terrified. Yet if they ask someone they trust for the *real*
meaning of what they perceive and are willing to let their
interpretations go in *favor* of reality, their fear goes with them.
When a child is helped to translate his "ghost" into a curtain, his
"monster" into a shadow, and his "dragon" into a dream, he is no longer
afraid and laughs happily at his own fear. You, my children, are afraid
of your brothers and of your Father and of *yourselves*. But you are
merely *deceived* in them.

^89^ Ask what they *are* of the Teacher of Reality, and hearing His
answer, you too will laugh at your fears and replace them with peace.
For fear lies not in reality, but in the minds of children who do not
understand reality. It is only their *lack* of understanding which
frightens them, and when they learn to perceive truly, they are not
afraid. And because of this, they will ask for truth again when they are
frightened. It is not the *reality* of your brothers or your Father or
yourself which frightens you. You do not know what they *are*, and so
you perceive them as ghosts and monsters and dragons. *Ask* of their
reality from the One who knows it, and He will *tell* you what they are.
For you do not understand them, and because you are deceived by what you
see, you *need* reality to dispel your fears.

^90^ Would you not exchange your fears for truth if the exchange is
yours for the asking? For if God is not deceived in you, you can be
deceived only in *yourself*. Yet you can learn the truth of yourself of
the Holy Spirit, who will teach you that, as part of God, deceit in
*you* is impossible. When you perceive yourself without deceit, you will
accept the real world in place of the false one you have made. And then
your Father will lean down to you and take the last step for you by
raising you unto Himself.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Eleven**](#part0004.html#chap-11) {#part0016_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**God's Plan for Salvation**](#part0004.html#chap-11) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-85) {#part0016_split_000.html#h1-85 .level1a1}

^11:1^ You have been told not to make error real, and the way to do this
is very simple. If you *want* to believe in error, you would *have* to
make it real because it is not true. But truth is real in its own right,
and to believe in truth, *you do not have to do anything*. Understand
that you do not respond to stimuli, but to stimuli *as you interpret
them*. Your interpretation thus becomes the justification for the
response. That is why analyzing the motives of others is hazardous to
*you*. If you decide that someone is really trying to attack you or
desert you or enslave you, you will respond *as* if he had actually done
so because you have made his error *real* to you. To interpret error is
to give it power, and having done this, you *will* overlook truth.

^2^ The analysis of ego-motivation is very complicated, very obscuring,
and *never* without the risk of your own ego-involvement. The whole
process represents a clear cut attempt to demonstrate your *own* ability
to understand what you perceive. This is shown by the fact that you
react to your interpretations *as if* they were correct and control your
reactions behaviorally but not emotionally. This is quite evidently a
mental split in which you have attacked the integrity of your mind and
pitted one level within it against another.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Judgment of the Holy Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-86) {#part0016_split_001.html#h1-86 .level1a}

^3^ There is but one interpretation of all motivation that makes any
sense. And because it is the Holy Spirit's judgment, it requires no
effort at all on your part. Every loving thought is true. Everything
else is an appeal for healing and help. That is what it is, regardless
of the form it takes. Can anyone be justified in responding with anger
to a plea for help? No response can be appropriate except the
willingness to give it to him, for this and *only* this is what he is
asking for. Offer him anything else, and you are assuming the right to
attack his reality by interpreting it as *you* see fit.

^4^ Perhaps the danger of this to your own mind is not yet fully
apparent to you, but this by no means signifies that it is not perfectly
clear. If you maintain that an appeal for help is something else, you
will *react* to something else, and your response will be inappropriate
to reality as *it* is but *not* to your perception of it. This is poor
reality testing by definition. There is nothing to prevent you from
recognizing *all* calls for help as exactly what they are except your
own perceived *need* to attack. It is only *this* that makes you willing
to engage in endless "battles" with reality in which you *deny* the
reality of the need for healing by making *it* unreal. You would not do
this except for your *unwillingness* to perceive reality, which you
withhold from *yourself*.

^5^ It is surely good advice to tell you not to judge what you do not
understand. No one with a personal investment is a reliable witness, for
truth to him has become what he *wants* it to be. If you are unwilling
to perceive an appeal for help as what it *is*, it is because you are
unwilling to *give* help *and to receive it*. The analysis of the ego's
"real" motivation is the modern equivalent of the inquisition, for in
both a brother's errors are "uncovered" and he is then attacked *for his
own good*. What can this be *but* projection? For *his* errors lay in
the minds of his interpreters, for which they punished *him*.

^6^ Whenever you fail to recognize a call for help, you are *refusing*
help. Would you maintain that you do not *need* it? Yet this *is* what
you are maintaining when you refuse to recognize a brother's appeal, for
only by *answering* his appeal can *you* be helped. Deny him your help,
and you will not perceive God's answer to *you*. The Holy Spirit does
not need your help in interpreting motivation, but you *do* need *His*.
Only *appreciation* is an appropriate response to your brother.
Gratitude is due him for both his loving thoughts and his appeals for
help, for both are capable of bringing love into *your* awareness if you
perceive them truly. And *all* your sense of strain comes from your
attempts *not* to do just this.

^7^ How simple, then, is God's plan for salvation. There is but *one*
response to reality, for reality evokes no conflict at all. There is but
*one* Teacher of reality, Who understands what it *is*. He does not
change His Mind about reality because *reality* does not change.
Although *your* interpretations of reality are meaningless in your
divided state, His remain consistently true. He *gives* them to you
because they are *for* you. Do not attempt to "help" a brother in *your*
way, for you cannot help yourselves. But hear his call for the help of
God, and you will recognize your *own* need for the Father.

^8^ Your interpretations of your brother's need is your interpretation
of *yours*. By *giving* help you are *asking* for it, and if you
perceive but one need in yourself, you *will* be healed. For you will
recognize God's answer as you want it to be, and if you want it in
truth, it will be truly yours. Every appeal you answer in the name of
Christ brings the remembrance of your Father closer to *your* awareness.
For the sake of *your* need, then, hear every call for help as what it
is, so God can answer *you*.

^9^ By applying the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the reactions of
others more and more consistently, you will gain an increasing awareness
that *His* criteria are equally applicable to *you*. For to *recognize*
fear is not enough to escape from it, although the recognition is
necessary to demonstrate the need for escape. The Holy Spirit must still
*translate* it into truth. If you were *left* with the fear, having
recognized it, you would have taken a step *away* from reality, not
*towards* it. Yet we have repeatedly emphasized the need to recognize
fear and face it *without* disguise as a crucial step in the undoing of
the ego. Consider how well the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the
motives of others will serve you then.

^10^ Having taught you to accept only loving thoughts in others and to
regard everything else as an appeal for help, He has taught you that
*fear* is an appeal for help. This is what recognizing it *really*
means. If you do not *protect* it, *He* will reinterpret it. That is the
ultimate value *to* you in learning to perceive attack as a call for
love. We have learned surely that fear and attack are inevitably
associated. If *only* attack produces fear and if you see attack as the
call for help that it *is*, the unreality of fear *must* dawn upon you.
For fear *is* a call for love in unconscious recognition of what has
been denied.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Mechanism of Miracles**](#part0004.html#level-87) {#part0016_split_002.html#h1-87 .level1a}

^11^ Fear is a symptom of your deep sense of loss. If when you perceive
it in others you learn to *supply* the loss, the basic *cause* of fear
is removed. Thereby you teach yourself that fear does not exist *in*
you, for you have *in* yourself the means for removing it and have
demonstrated this by *giving* it. Fear and love are the only emotions of
which you are capable. One is false, for it was made out of denial, and
denial depends on the real belief in what is denied for its *own*
existence.

^12^ By interpreting fear correctly *as a positive affirmation of the
underlying belief it masks*, you are undermining its perceived
usefulness by rendering it useless. Defenses which do not work at all
are *automatically* discarded. If you raise what fear conceals to
*clear-cut, unequivocal predominance*, fear becomes meaningless. You
have denied its power to conceal love, which was its only purpose. The
mask which *you* have drawn across the face of love has disappeared.

^13^ If you would look upon love, which *is* the world's reality, how
could you do better than to recognize in every defense *against* it the
underlying appeal *for* it? And how could you better learn of its
reality than by answering the appeal for it by *giving* it? The Holy
Spirit's interpretation of fear *does* dispel it, for the *awareness* of
truth cannot *be* denied. Thus does the Holy Spirit replace fear with
love and translate error into truth. And thus will *you* learn of Him
how to replace your dream of separation with the fact of unity. For the
separation is only the *denia*l of union and, correctly interpreted,
attests to your eternal knowledge that union is true.

^14^ Miracles are merely the translation of denial into truth. If to
love oneself is to *heal* oneself, those who are sick do *not* love
themselves. Therefore, they are asking for the love that would heal them
but which they are denying to themselves. If they knew the truth about
themselves, they could not *be* sick. The task of the miracle-worker
thus becomes *to deny the denial of truth*. The sick must heal
*themselves*, for the truth is in them. Yet, having *obscured* it, the
light in *another* mind must shine into theirs because that light *is*
theirs.

^15^ The light in them shines as brightly, *regardless* of the density
of the fog that obscures it. If *you* give no power to the fog to
obscure the light, it *has* none, for it has power only because the Son
of God gave power to it. He must *himself* withdraw that power,
remembering that *all* power is of God. *You can remember this for all
the Sonship*. Do not allow your brother not to remember, for his
forgetfulness is *yours*. But *your* remembering is *his*, for God
cannot be remembered alone. *This is what you have forgotten*. To
perceive the healing of your brother as the healing of yourself is thus
the way to remember God. For you forgot your brothers *wit*h Him, and
God's answer to your forgetting is but the way to remember.

^16^ Perceive in sickness but another call for love and offer your
brother what he believes he cannot offer himself. Whatever the sickness,
there is but *one* remedy. You will be made whole as you *make* whole,
for to perceive in sickness the appeal for health is to recognize in
hatred the call for love. And to give a brother what he *really* wants
is to offer it unto yourself, for your Father wills you to know your
brother *as* yourself. Answer *his* call for love and *yours* is
answered. Healing is the love of Christ for His Father and for
*Himself*.

^17^ Remember what we said about the frightening perceptions of little
children which terrify them because they do not understand them. If they
ask for enlightenment and *accept* it, their fears vanish, but if they
*hide* their nightmares, they will *keep* them. It is easy to help an
uncertain child, for he recognizes that he does not know what his
perceptions mean. Yet you believe that you *do* know. Little children,
you are hiding your heads under the covers of the heavy blankets you
have laid upon yourselves. You are hiding your nightmares in the
darkness of your own certainty and refusing to open your eyes *and look
at them*.

^18^ Let us not save nightmares, for they are not fitting offerings for
Christ, and so they are not fit gifts for *you*. Take off the covers and
look at what you are afraid of. Only the *anticipation* will frighten
you, for the reality of nothingness cannot *be* frightening. Let us not
delay this, for your dream of hatred will not leave you without help,
and help is here. Learn to be quiet in the midst of turmoil, for
quietness is the end of strife and this is the journey to peace. Look
straight at every image that rises to delay you, for the goal is
inevitable because it is eternal. The goal of love is but your right,
and it belongs to you *despite* your preference.

^19^ *You still want what God wills*, and no nightmare can defeat a
Child of God in his purpose. For your purpose was given you by God, and
you must accomplish it *because* it is His Will. Awake and remember your
purpose, for it is *your* will to do so. What has been accomplished for
you *must* be yours. Do not let your hatred stand in the way of love,
for *nothing* can withstand the love of Christ for His Father or His
Father's love for Him.

^20^ A little while and you *will* see me, for I am not hidden because
*you* are hiding. I will awaken you as surely as I awakened myself, for
I awoke *for* you. In *my* resurrection is *your* release. Our mission
is to escape *crucifixion*, not redemption. Trust in my help, for I did
not walk alone, and I will walk with you as our Father walked with me.
Did you not know that I walked with Him in peace? And does not that mean
that peace goes with *us* on the journey?

^21^ There is no fear in perfect love. We will but be making perfect to
you what is *already* perfect *in* you. You do not fear the *unknown*,
but the *known*. You will not fail in your mission because I failed not
in mine. Give me but a little trust in the name of the *complete* trust
I have in you, and we will easily accomplish the goal of perfection
together. For perfection *is* and cannot *be* denied. To deny the denial
of perfection is not so difficult as the denial of truth, and what we
can accomplish together *must* be believed when you *see* it as
accomplished.

^22^ You who have tried to banish love have not succeeded, but you who
choose to banish fear *will* succeed. The Lord is with you, but you know
it not. Yet your Redeemer liveth and abideth in you in the peace out of
which He was created. Would you not exchange *this* awareness for the
awareness of your fear? When we have overcome fear-not by hiding it, not
by minimizing it, not by denying its full import in any way-this *is*
what you will really see. You cannot lay aside the obstacle to real
vision without looking upon it, for to lay aside means to judge
*against*. If *you* will look, the Holy Spirit will judge and will judge
truly. He cannot shine away what *you* keep hidden, for you have not
offered it to Him, and He cannot take it *from* you.

^23^ We are therefore embarking on an organized, well-structured, and
carefully planned program aimed at learning how to offer to the Holy
Spirit everything you do *not* want. *He* knows what to do with it. You
do *not* know how to use what He knows. Whatever is revealed to Him that
is not of God is gone. Yet you must reveal it to *yourself* in perfect
willingness, for otherwise His knowledge remains useless to you. Surely
He will not fail to help you, since help is His *only* purpose. Do you
not have greater reason for fearing the world as *you* perceive it than
for looking at the cause of fear and letting it go forever?
:::

[]{#part0016_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Investment in Reality**](#part0004.html#level-88) {#part0016_split_003.html#h1-88 .level1a}

^24^ I once asked if you were willing to sell all you have and give to
the poor and follow me. This is what I meant: If you had no investment
in anything in this world, you could teach the poor where their treasure
*is*. The poor are merely those who have invested wrongly, and they are
poor indeed! Because they are in need, it is given you to help them
since *you* are among them. Consider how perfectly your lesson would be
learned if you were unwilling to *share* their poverty. For poverty is
lack, and there is but *one* lack since there is but *one* need.

^25^ Suppose a brother insists on having you do something you think you
do not want to do. The very fact of his insistence should tell you that
he believes salvation lies in it. If you insist on refusing and
experience a quick response of opposition, you are believing that *your*
salvation lies in *not* doing it. You, then, are making the same mistake
that he is and are making his error real to *both* of you. Insistence
means investment, and what you invest in is *always* related to your
notion of salvation. The question is always two-fold-first, *what* is to
be saved, and second, *how* can it be saved?

^26^ Whenever you become angry with a brother, for *whatever* reason,
you are believing that the *ego* is to be saved and to be saved by
*attack*. If *he* attacks, you are agreeing with this belief, and if
*you* attack, you are reinforcing it. *Remember that those who attack
are poor*. Their poverty asks for gifts, *not* for further
impoverishment. You who could help them are surely acting destructively
if you accept their poverty as *yours*. If you had not invested as
*they* had, it would never occur to you to overlook their need.

^27^ Recognize *what does not matter,* and if your brothers ask you for
something "outrageous," do it *because* it does not matter. Refuse and
your opposition establishes that it *does* matter to you. It is only
*you*, therefore, who have made the request outrageous, for nothing can
*be* asked of you, and every request of a brother is for *you*. Why
would you insist in *denying* him? For to do so is to deny yourself and
impoverish both. *He* is asking for salvation, as *you* are. Poverty is
of the ego and *never* of God. No "outrageous" request can be made of
one who recognizes what is valuable and wants to accept nothing else.

^28^ Salvation is for the mind, and it is attained through peace. This
is the *only* thing that can be saved and the *only* way to save it. Any
response *other* than love arises from a confusion about the "what" and
the "how" of salvation, and this is the *only* answer. Never lose sight
of this, and never allow yourself to believe even for an instant that
there *is* another answer. For you will surely place yourself among the
poor, who do not understand that they dwell in abundance and that
salvation is come.

^29^ To identify with the ego is to attack yourself and *make* yourself
poor. That is why everyone who identifies with the ego feels deprived.
What he *experiences* then is depression or anger, but what he *did* is
to exchange his self-love for self-hate, making him *afraid* of himself.
He does *not* realize this. Even if he is fully aware of anxiety, he
does not perceive its source as his own *ego identification*, and he
*always* tries to handle it by making some sort of insane "arrangement"
with the world. He always perceives this world as *outside* himself, for
this is crucial to his adjustment. He does not realize that he *makes*
this world, for there *is* no world outside of him.

^30^ If only the loving thoughts of God's Son are the world's reality,
the real world *must* be in his mind. His insane thoughts, too, must be
in his mind, but an internal conflict of this magnitude he cannot
tolerate. A split mind *is* endangered, and the recognition that it
encompasses completely opposed thoughts within itself *is* intolerable.
Therefore the mind projects the split, *not* the reality. Everything you
perceive as the outside world is merely your attempt to maintain your
ego identification, for everyone believes that identification is
salvation. Yet consider what has happened, for thoughts *do* have
consequences to the thinker.

^31^ You are *at odds* with the world as you perceive it because you
think *it* is antagonistic to *you*. This is a necessary consequence of
what you have done. You have projected outward what *is* antagonistic to
what is inward, and therefore you would *have* to perceive it this way.
That is why you must realize that your hatred is *in* your mind and
*not* outside it before you can get rid of it and why you must get rid
of it *before* you can perceive the world as it really is.

^32^ We once said that God so loved the world that He gave it to His
only-begotten Son. God *does* love the real world, and those who
perceive *its* reality cannot *see* the world of death. For death is
*not* of the real world, in which everything is eternal. God gave you
the real world in exchange for the one you made out of your split mind,
and which *is* the symbol of death. For if you could *really* separate
yourselves from the Mind of God, you *would* die, and the world you
perceive *is* a world of separation.

^33^ You were willing to accept even death to deny your Father. Yet He
would not have it so, and so it is *not* so. You still could not will
against Him, and that is why you have no control over the world you
made. It is not a world of will because it is governed by the desire to
be unlike Him, and this desire is *not* will. The world you made is
therefore totally chaotic, governed by arbitrary and senseless "laws,"
and without meaning of *any* kind. For it was made out of what you do
*not* want, projected from your mind because you were afraid of it.

^34^ Yet this world is *only* in the mind of its maker along with his
*real* salvation. Do not believe it is outside of yourself, for only by
recognizing *where* it is will you gain control over it. For you *do*
have control over your mind since the mind is the mechanism of decision.
If you will recognize that *all* attack which you perceive is in your
own mind *and nowhere else*, you will at last have placed its source,
and where it began it must end. For in this same place also lies
salvation. The altar of God where Christ abideth is there.

^35^ You have defiled the altar but *not* the world. Yet Christ has
placed the Atonement on the altar *for* you. Bring your perceptions of
the world to this altar, for it is the altar to truth. There you will
see your vision changed, and there you will learn to see truly. From
this place, where God and His Son dwell in peace and where you are
welcome, you will look out in peace and behold the world truly. Yet to
find the place, you must relinquish your investment in the world as
*you* have projected it, allowing the Holy Spirit to project the real
world to you from the altar of God.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Seeking and Finding**](#part0004.html#level-89) {#part0016_split_004.html#h1-89 .level1a}

^36^ The ego is certain that love is dangerous, and this is always its
central teaching. It never *puts* it this way; on the contrary, everyone
who believes that the ego is salvation is intensely engaged in the
search for love. Yet the ego, though encouraging the search very
actively, makes one proviso-do not *find* it. Its dictates, then, can be
summed up simply as, "Seek and do *not* find." This is the one promise
the ego holds out to you and the one promise it will *keep*. For the ego
pursues its goal with fanatic insistence, and its reality testing,
though severely impaired, is completely consistent.

^37^ The search which the ego undertakes is therefore bound to be
defeated. And since it also teaches that it is *your* identification,
its guidance leads you to a journey which must end in perceived
*self*-defeat. For the ego *cannot* love, and in its frantic search for
love, it is seeking what it is *afraid* to find. The search is
inevitable because the ego is part of your mind, and because of its
source, the ego is not wholly split off, or it could not be believed at
all. For it is *your* mind that believes in it and gives existence to
it. Yet it is also your mind that has the power to *deny* the ego's
existence, and you will surely do so when you realize exactly what the
journey is on which the ego sets you.

^38^ It is surely obvious that no one wants to find what would *utterly*
defeat him. Being unable to love, the ego would be totally inadequate in
love's presence, for it could not respond at all. You would *have* to
abandon the ego's guidance, for it would be quite apparent that it had
not taught you the response pattern you *need*. The ego will therefore
*distort* love and teach you that love calls forth the responses which
the ego *can* teach. Follow its teaching, then, and you will *search*
for love but will not *recognize* it.

^39^ Do you realize that the ego must set you on a journey which cannot
*but* lead to a sense of futility and depression? To seek and *not* to
find is hardly joyous. Is this the promise *you* would keep? The Holy
Spirit offers you another promise, and one that will lead to joy. For
*His* promise is always, "Seek and you will *find*," and under His
guidance you cannot *be* defeated. His is the journey to
*accomplishment*, and the goal He sets before you He will *give* you.
For He will never deceive God's Son, whom He loves with the love of the
Father.

^40^ You *will* undertake a journey because you are *not* at home in
this world. And you *will* search for your home whether you know where
it is or not. If you believe it is outside yourself, the search will be
futile, for you will be seeking it where it is not. You do not know how
to look within yourself, for you do not *believe* your home is there.
Yet the Holy Spirit knows it *for* you, and He will guide you *to* your
home because that is His mission. As He fulfills *His* mission, He will
teach you *yours*, for your mission is the same as His. By guiding your
*brothers* home, you are but following Him.

^41^ Behold the Guide your Father gave you that you might learn you have
eternal life. For death is not your Father's Will nor yours, and
whatever is true *is* the Will of the Father. You pay no price for life,
for that was given you, but you *do* pay a price for death, and a very
heavy one. If death is your treasure, you will sell everything else to
purchase it. And you will believe that you *have* purchased it *because*
you have sold everything else. Yet you *cannot* sell the Kingdom of
Heaven. Your inheritance can neither be bought *nor* sold. There can
*be* no disinherited parts of the Sonship, for God is whole, and all His
extensions are like Him.

^42^ The Atonement was not the price of our wholeness, but it *was* the
price of your *awareness* of your wholeness. For what you chose to
"sell" had to be kept for you since you could not "buy" it back. Yet
*you* must invest in it, not with money but *with* your spirit. For
Spirit is will, and will *is* the "price" of the Kingdom. Your
inheritance awaits only the recognition that you have *been* redeemed.
The Holy Spirit guides you into life eternal, but *you* must relinquish
your investment in death, or you will not *see* life though it is all
around you.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Sane Curriculum**](#part0004.html#level-90) {#part0016_split_005.html#h1-90 .level1a}

^43^ Only love is strong because it is *undivided*. The strong do not
attack because they see no need to do so. *Before* the idea of attack
can enter your mind, you must have *perceived* yourself as weak. Because
you had attacked yourself and believed that the attack was *effective*,
you behold yourself as weakened. No longer perceiving yourself and all
your brothers as equal and regarding yourself as *weaker*, you attempt
to "equalize" the situation *you* have made. You use attack to do so
because you believe that attack was successful in weakening *you*.

^44^ That is why the recognition of your *own* invulnerability is so
important in the restoration of your sanity. For if you accept your
invulnerability, you are recognizing that attack *has* no effect.
Although you have attacked yourself, and very brutally, you will
demonstrate that *nothing happened*. Therefore, by attacking you have
not done *anything*. Once you realize this, there is no longer any
*sense* in attack, for it manifestly *does* not work and *cannot*
protect you. Yet the recognition of your invulnerability has more than
negative value. If your attacks on yourself have *failed* to weaken you,
*you* are still strong. You therefore have no need to "equalize" the
situation to establish your strength.

^45^ You will never realize the utter uselessness of attack *except* by
recognizing that your attack on *yourself* had no effects. For others
*do* react to attack if they perceive it, and if you are trying to
attack *them*, you will be unable to avoid interpreting this as
reinforcement. The *only* place where you can cancel out all
reinforcement is in *yourself*. For *you* are always the first point of
your attack, and if *this* has never been, it *has* no consequences.

^46^ The Holy Spirit's love is your strength, for yours is divided and
therefore not real. You could not trust your own love when you have
*attacked* it. You cannot learn of perfect love with a split mind
because a split mind has *made* itself a poor learner. You tried to make
the separation eternal because you wanted to retain the characteristics
of creation with your own *content*. Yet creation is *not* of you, and
poor learners need special teaching. You have learning handicaps in a
very literal sense.

^47^ There are areas in your learning skills which are so impaired that
you can progress only under constant, clear-cut direction provided by a
Teacher Who can *transcend* your limited resources. He *becomes* your
resource because, of *yourself*, you *cannot* learn. The learning
situation in which you placed yourself *is* impossible, and in this
situation you clearly require a special Teacher and a special
curriculum. Poor learners are not good choices for teachers, either for
themselves or for anyone else. You would hardly turn to *them* to
establish the curriculum by which they can *escape* from their
limitations. If they understood what is beyond them, they would not *be*
handicapped.

^48^ You do not know the meaning of love, and that *is* your handicap.
Do not attempt to teach yourselves what you do not understand, and do
not try to set up curriculum goals where yours have clearly failed.
*Your* learning goal has been *not* to learn, and this *cannot* lead to
successful learning. You cannot transfer what you have not learned, and
the impairment of the ability to generalize is a crucial learning
failure. Would you ask those who have *failed* to learn what learning
aids are *for? They do not know*. For if they could interpret the aids
correctly, they would have learned from them.

^49^ We have said that the ego's rule is, "Seek and do *not* find."
Translated into curricular terms, this is the same as saying, "*Try* to
learn but do *not* succeed." The result of this curriculum goal is
obvious. Every legitimate teaching aid, every real instruction, and
every sensible guide to learning *will be misinterpreted*. For they are
all for learning facilitation, which this strange curriculum goal is
*against*. If you are trying to learn how *not* to learn and are using
the aim of teaching to *defeat* itself, what can you expect *but*
confusion? The curriculum does not make *sense*.

^50^ This kind of "learning" has so weakened your mind that you *cannot*
love, for the curriculum you have chosen is *against* love and amounts
to a course in *how to attack yourself*. A necessary minor,
supplementing this major curriculum goal, is learning how *not* to
overcome the split which made this goal believable. And you can *not*
overcome it, for all *you*r learning is on its *behalf*. Yet your will
speaks against your learning, as your learning speaks against your will,
and so you fight *against* learning and succeed, for that *is* your
will. But you do not realize even yet that there *is* something you *do*
will to learn, and that you can learn it because it *is* your will to do
so.

^51^ You who have tried to learn what you do *not* will should take
heart, for although the curriculum you set yourself is depressing
indeed, it is merely ridiculous if you look at it. Is it *possible* that
the way to achieve a goal is *not* to attain it? Resign *now* as your
own teachers. *This* resignation will *not* lead to depression. It is
merely the result of an honest appraisal of what you have taught
yourselves and of the learning outcomes which have resulted. Under the
proper learning conditions, which you can neither provide nor
understand, you will become excellent learners and teachers. But it is
not so yet and will not *be* so until the whole learning situation as
*you* have set it up is reversed.

^52^ Your learning *potential*, properly understood, is limitless
because it will lead you to God. You can *teach* the way to Him *and*
learn it if you follow the Teacher Who knows it and His curriculum for
learning it. The curriculum is totally unambiguous because the goal is
*not* divided, and the means and the end are in *complete* accord. You
need offer only *undivided attention*. Everything else will be *given*
you. For it is *your* will to learn aright, and nothing can oppose the
will of God's Son. His learning is as unlimited as *he* is.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Vision of Christ**](#part0004.html#level-91) {#part0016_split_006.html#h1-91 .level1a}

^53^ The ego is trying to teach you how to gain the whole world and lose
your own Soul. The Holy Spirit teaches that you *cannot* lose your Soul
and there *is* no gain in the world, for *of itself* it profits nothing.
To invest in something without profit is surely to impoverish yourself,
and the overhead is high. Not only is there no profit in the investment,
but the cost to *you* is enormous. For this investment costs you the
world's reality by denying *yours* and gives you nothing in return. You
*cannot* sell your Soul, but you *can* sell your *awareness* of it. You
cannot perceive your Soul, but you will not *know* it while you perceive
anything *else* as more valuable.

^54^ The Holy Spirit is your strength because He perceives nothing *but*
your Soul as you. He is perfectly aware that you do *not* know
yourselves and perfectly aware of how to teach you what you are.
*Because* He loves you, He will gladly teach you what He loves, for He
wills to share it. Remembering you always, He cannot let you forget your
worth. For the Father never ceases to remind Him of His Son, and He
never ceases to remind His Son of the Father. God is in your memory
*because* of Him. You chose to forget your Father, but you did not
*will* to do so, and therefore you can decide otherwise. As it was *my*
decision, so is it *yours*.

^55^ You do not *want* the world. The only thing of value in it is
whatever part of it you look upon with love. This gives it the only
reality it will ever have. Its value is *not* in itself, but yours *is*
in you. As self-value comes from self-*extension*, so does the
*perception* of self-value come from the projection of loving thoughts
outward. Make the world real unto *yourself*, for the real world is the
gift of the Holy Spirit, and so it *belongs* to you.

^56^ Correction is for all who cannot see. To open the eyes of the blind
is the Holy Spirit's mission, for He knows that they have not lost their
vision but merely sleep. He would awaken them from the sleep of
forgetting to the remembering of God. Christ's eyes are open, and He
will look upon whatever you see with love if you accept His vision as
yours.

^57^ The Holy Spirit keeps the vision of Christ for every Son of God who
sleeps. In His sight the Son of God is perfect, and He longs to share
His vision with you. He will show you the real world because God gave
you Heaven. Through Him your Father calls His Son to remember. The
awakening of His Son begins with his investment in the *real* world, and
by this he will learn to reinvest in *himself*. For reality is one with
the Father *and* the Son, and the Holy Spirit blesses the real world in
their name.

^58^ When you have seen this real world, as you will surely do, you
*will* remember us. Yet you must learn the cost of sleeping and *refuse*
to pay it. Only then will you decide to awaken. And then the real world
will spring to your sight, for Christ has never slept. He is waiting to
be seen, for He has never lost sight of *you*. He looks quietly on the
real world, which He would share with you because He knows of the
Father's love for Him. And knowing this, He would give you what is
yours. In perfect peace He waits for you at His Father's altar, holding
out the Father's love to you in the quiet light of the Holy Spirit's
blessing. For the Holy Spirit will lead everyone home to his Father,
where Christ waits as his Self.

^59^ Every Child of God is one in Christ, for his Being is in Christ as
Christ's is in God. Christ's love for you is His love for His Father,
which He knows because He knows His Father's love for Him. When the Holy
Spirit has at last led you to Christ at the altar to His Father,
perception fuses into knowledge because perception has become so holy
that its transfer to holiness is merely its natural extension. Love
transfers to love without any interference, for the situations are
identical. \[Only the ability to make this transfer is the product of
learning.\] As you perceive more and more common elements in *all*
situations, the transfer of your training under the Holy Spirit's
guidance increases and becomes generalized. Gradually you learn to apply
it to everyone and everything, for its applicability *is* universal.
When this has been accomplished, perception and knowledge have become so
similar that they share the unification of the laws of God.

^60^ What is one cannot be perceived as separate, and the denial of the
separation *is* the reinstatement of knowledge. At the altar of God, the
holy perception of God's Son becomes so enlightened that light streams
into it, and the Spirit of God's Son shines in the Mind of the Father
and becomes one with it. Very gently does God shine upon Himself, loving
the extension of Himself which is His Son. The world has no purpose as
it blends into the purpose of God. For the real world has slipped
quietly into Heaven, where everything eternal in it has always been.
There the Redeemer and the redeemed join in perfect love of God and of
each other. Heaven is your home, and being in God, it must *also* be in
you.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Guide for Miracles**](#part0004.html#level-92) {#part0016_split_007.html#h1-92 .level1a}

^61^ Miracles demonstrate that learning has occurred under the right
guidance, for learning is invisible, and what has been learned can be
recognized only by its *results*. Its generalization is demonstrated as
you use it in more and more situations. You will recognize that you have
learned there is no order of difficulty in miracles when you have
applied them to *all* situations. There *is* no situation to which
miracles do not apply, and by applying them to all situations, you will
gain the real world. For in this holy perception, you will be made
whole, and the Atonement will radiate from *your* acceptance of it for
*yourself* to everyone the Holy Spirit sends you for your blessing. In
every Child of God His blessing lies, and in *your* blessing of the
Children of God is His blessing to *you*.

^62^ Everyone in the world must play his part in the redemption of the
world to recognize that the world *has* been redeemed. You cannot see
the invisible. Yet if you see its effects, you *know* it must be there.
By perceiving what it *does*, you recognize its being. And by *what* it
does, you learn what it *is*. You cannot *see* your abilities, but you
gain confidence in their existence as they enable you to *act*. And the
*results* of your actions you *can* see.

^63^ The Holy Spirit is invisible, but you can see the *results* of His
Presence, and through them you will learn that He is there. What He
enables you to do is clearly *not* of this world, for miracles violate
every law of reality as this world judges it. Every law of time and
space, of magnitude and mass, of prediction and control is transcended,
for what the Holy Spirit enables you to do is clearly beyond *all* of
them. Perceiving His results, you will understand *where* He must be and
finally *know* what He is.

^64^ You cannot see the Holy Spirit, but you can see His manifestations.
And unless you do, you will not realize He is there. Miracles are His
witnesses and speak for His Presence. What you cannot see becomes real
to you only through the witnesses who speak for it. For you can be
*aware* of what you cannot see, and it can become compellingly real to
you as its presence becomes manifest *through* you. Do the Holy Spirit's
work, for you *share* in His function. As your function in Heaven is
creation, so your function on earth is healing. God shares His function
with you in Heaven, and the Holy Spirit shares His with you on earth.

^65^ As long as you believe you have two functions, so long will you
need correction. For this belief is the *destruction* of peace, a goal
in direct opposition to the Holy Spirit's purpose. You see what you
*expect,* and you expect what you *invite*. Your perception is the
result of your invitation, coming to you as you sent for it. Whose
manifestations would you see? Of whose presence would you be convinced?
For you will believe in what you *manifest*, and as you look out, so
will you see in. Two ways of looking at the world are in your mind, and
your perception will reflect the guidance you chose.

^66^ I am the manifestation of the Holy Spirit, and when you see me, it
will be because you have invited Him. For He *will* send you His
witnesses if you will but look upon them. Remember always that you see
what you seek, for what you seek you *will* find. The ego finds what
*it* seeks and *only* that. It does not find love, for that is *not*
what it is seeking. Yet seeking and finding are the same, and if you
seek for two goals you will find them, but you will *recognize* neither.
For you will think they are the same because you *want* them both. The
mind always strives for integration, and if it is split and wants to
*keep* the split, it will believe it has one goal by *making* it one.

^67^ We said before that *what* you project is up to you, but it is
*not* up to you *whether* to project, for projection is a law of mind.
Perception *is* projection, and you look in *before* you look out. As
you look in you choose the guide for seeing, and *then* you look out and
behold his witnesses. This is *why* you find what you seek. What you
want in *yourself*, you will make manifest by projection, and you will
accept it *from* the world because you put it there *by* wanting it.

^68^ When you think you are projecting what you do *not* want, it is
still because you *do* want it. This leads directly to dissociation, for
it represents the acceptance of two goals, each perceived in a
*different* place, separated from each other *because* you made them
different. The mind then sees a divided world *outside* itself but not
*within*. This gives it an illusion of integrity and enables it to
believe that it is pursuing one goal. As long as you perceive the world
as split, *you* are not healed. For to be healed is to pursue one goal
because you have *accepted* only one and *want* but one.

^69^ When you want *only* love you will see nothing else. The
contradictory nature of the witnesses you perceive is merely the
reflection of your conflicting invitations. You have looked upon your
minds and accepted opposition there, having *sought* it there. But do
not then believe that the witnesses for opposition are true, for they
attest only to *your* decision about reality, returning to you the
message you *gave* them. Love is recognized by its messengers. If you
make love manifest, its messengers will come to you because you
*invited* them.

^70^ The power of decision is your one remaining freedom as a prisoner
of this world. *You can decide to see it right*. What *you* made of it
is *not* its reality, for its reality is only what you *gav*e it. You
cannot really give anything but love to anyone or anything, nor can you
really *receive* anything else from them. If you think you have received
anything else, it is because you have looked within and thought you saw
the power to give something else *within yourself*. It was only this
decision that determined what you found, for it was the decision of what
you *sought*.

^71^ You are afraid of me because you looked within and are afraid of
what you saw. Yet you could not have seen reality, for the reality of
your mind is the loveliest of God's creations. Coming only from God, its
power and grandeur could only bring you peace *if you really looked upon
it.* If you are afraid, it is because you saw something *that is not
there*. Yet in that same place, you could have looked upon me and all
your brothers in the perfect safety of the Mind which created us. For we
are there in the peace of the Father, Who wills to project His peace
through *you*.

^72^ When you have accepted your mission to *project* peace, you will
*find* it, for by *making it manifest*, you will *see* it. Its holy
witnesses will surround you because you *called* upon them and they will
come to you. I have heard your call and I have answered it, but you will
not look upon me nor *hear* the answer which you sought. That is because
you do not yet want *only* that. Yet as I become more real to you, you
will learn that you *do* want only that. And you will see me as you look
within, and we will look upon the world as God created it together.
Through the eyes of Christ, *only* the real world exists and can *be*
seen. As you decide, so will you see. And all that you see but witnesses
to your decision.

^73^ When you look within and see me, it will be because you have
decided to manifest truth. And as you manifest it, you will see it both
without *and* within, for you will see it without *because* you saw it
first within. Everything you behold without is a judgment of what you
beheld within. If it is *your* judgment, it will be wrong, for judgment
is not your function. If it is the judgment of the Holy Spirit, it will
be right, for judgment *is* His function. You share His function only by
judging as *He* does, reserving no judgment at all unto yourselves. For
you will judge *against* yourselves, but *He* will judge *for* you.

^74^ Remember, then, that whenever you look without and react
unfavorably to what you see, you have judged yourself unworthy and have
condemned yourself to death. The death penalty is the ego's ultimate
goal, for it fully believes that you are a criminal, as deserving of
death as God knows you are deserving of life. The death penalty never
leaves the ego's mind, for that is what it always reserves for you in
the end. Wanting to kill you as the final expression of its feeling for
you, it lets you live but to await death. It will torment you while you
live, but its hatred is not satisfied until you die. For your
destruction is the one end toward which it works, and the only end with
which it will be satisfied.

^75^ The ego is not a traitor to God to Whom treachery is impossible,
but it *is* a traitor to you who believe *you* have been treacherous to
your Father. That is why the *undoing* of guilt is an essential part of
the Holy Spirit's teaching. For as long as you feel guilty, you are
listening to the voice of the ego, which tells you that you *have* been
treacherous to God and therefore *deserve* death. You will think that
death comes from God and *not* from the ego because, by confusing
yourself *with* the ego, you believe that *you* want death. And from
what you want, God does *not* save you.

^76^ When you are tempted to yield to the desire for death, *remember
that I did not die*. You will realize that this is true when you look
within and *see* me. Would I have overcome death for myself alone? And
would eternal life have been given me of the Father *unless* He had also
given it to you? When you learn to make *me* manifest, *you* will never
see death. For you will have looked upon the deathless in *yourself*,
and you will see only the eternal as you look out upon a world that
*cannot* die.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. Reality and Redemption**](#part0004.html#level-93) {#part0016_split_008.html#h1-93 .level1a}

^77^ Do you *really* believe that you can kill the Son of God? The
Father has hidden His Son safely within Himself and kept him far away
from your destructive thoughts, but *you* know neither the Father nor
the Son because of them. You attack the real world every day and every
hour and every minute, and yet you are surprised that you cannot see it.
If you seek love in order to attack it, you will *never* find it. For if
love is sharing, how can you find it except through *itself*? Offer it
and it will come to you because it is drawn to itself. But offer attack
and it will remain hidden, for it can live only in peace.

^78^ God's Son is as safe as his Father, for the Son knows his Father's
protection and *cannot* fear. His Father's love holds him in perfect
peace, and needing nothing, he *asks* for nothing. Yet he is far from
you whose Self he is, for you chose to attack him, and he disappeared
from your sight into his Father. *He* did not change, but *you* did. For
a split mind and all its works were not created by the Father and could
not live in the knowledge of Him.

^79^ When you made what is *not* true visible, what *is* true became
invisible. Yet it cannot be invisible in *itself*, for the Holy Spirit
sees it with perfect clarity. It is invisible to you because you are
looking at something *else*. Yet it is no more up to you to decide what
is visible and what is invisible than it is up to you to decide what
reality is. What can be seen is what the *Holy Spirit* sees. The
definition of reality is God's, not yours. *He* created it, and *He*
knows what it is. You who knew have forgotten, and unless He had given
you a way to remember, you would have condemned yourselves to oblivion.

^80^ Because of your Father's love you can *never* forget Him, for no
one can forget what God Himself placed in his memory. You can *deny* it,
but you cannot *lose* it. A Voice will answer every question you ask,
and a Vision will correct the perception of everything you see. For what
you have made invisible is the *only* truth, and what you have not heard
is the *only* answer. God would reunite you with yourself and did not
abandon you in your seeming distress. You are waiting only for Him and
do not know it. Yet His memory shines in your minds and cannot *be*
obliterated. It is no more past than future, being forever always.

^81^ You have but to ask for this memory, and you *will* remember. Yet
the memory of God cannot shine in a mind which has *made* it invisible
and wants to *keep* it so. For the memory of God can dawn only in a mind
that wills to remember and that has relinquished the insane desire to
control reality. You who cannot even control yourselves should hardly
aspire to control the universe. But look upon what you have made of it
and rejoice that it is not so. Son of God, be not content with nothing!
What is not real cannot *be* seen and *has* no value. God could not
offer His Son what has no value, nor could His Son receive it. You were
redeemed the instant you thought you had deserted Him.

^82^ Everything you made has never been and is invisible because the
Holy Spirit does not see it. Yet what He *does* see is yours to behold,
and through His vision your perception is healed. You have made the
invisible the only truth that this world holds. Valuing nothing, you
have sought nothing and *found* nothing. By making nothing *real* to
you, you have *seen* it. *But it is not there*. And Christ is invisible
to you because of what you have made visible to *yourselves*. Yet it
does not matter how much distance you have tried to interpose between
your awareness and truth. God's Son *can* be seen because his vision is
shared. The Holy Spirit looks upon him and sees nothing else in *you*.
What is invisible to you is perfect in His sight and encompasses *all*
of it. He has remembered you because He forgot not the Father.

^83^ You looked upon the unreal and found despair. Yet by seeking the
unreal, what else *could* you find? The unreal world *is* a thing of
despair, for it can never be. And you who share God's Being with Him
could never be content without reality. What God did not give you has no
power over you, and the attraction of love for love remains
irresistible. For it is the function of love to unite all things unto
itself, and to hold all things together by extending its wholeness.

^84^ The real world was given you by God in loving exchange for the
world *you* made and which *you* see. But take it from the hand of
Christ and look upon it. Its reality will make everything else
invisible, for beholding it is *total* perception. And as you look upon
it, you will remember that it was always so. Nothingness will become
invisible, for you will at last have seen truly. Redeemed perception is
easily translated into knowledge, for *only* perception is capable of
error, and perception has never been. Being corrected, it gives place to
knowledge, which is forever the *only* reality. The Atonement is but the
way back to what was never lost. Your Father could not cease to love His
Son.
:::

[]{#part0016_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. Guiltlessness and Invulnerability**](#part0004.html#level-94) {#part0016_split_009.html#h1-94 .level1a}

^85^ If you did not feel guilty, you *could* not attack, for
condemnation is the root of attack. It is the judgment of one mind by
another as *unworthy* of love and *deserving* of punishment. But herein
lies the split. For the mind that judges perceives itself as *separate*
from the mind being judged, believing that by punishing another, *it*
will escape punishment. All this is but the delusional attempt of the
mind to deny itself and *escape the penalty of denial*. It is not an
attempt to *relinquish* denial but to *hold on* to it. For it is guilt
that has obscured the Father to you, and it is guilt that has driven you
insane.

^86^ The acceptance of guilt into the mind of God's Son was the
beginning of the separation, as the acceptance of the Atonement is its
end. The world you see is the delusional system of those made mad by
guilt. Look carefully at this world, and you will realize that this is
so. For this world is the symbol of punishment, and all the laws which
seem to govern it are the laws of death. Children are born into it
through pain and in pain. Their growth is attended by suffering, and
they learn of sorrow and separation and death. Their minds are trapped
in their brain, and its powers decline if their bodies are hurt. They
seem to love, yet they desert and are deserted. They appear to lose what
they love, perhaps the most insane belief of all. And their bodies
wither and gasp and are laid in the ground and seem to be no more. Not
one of them but has thought that God is cruel.

^87^ If this *were* the real world, God *would* be cruel. For no father
could subject his children to this as the price of salvation and *be*
loving. *Love does not kill to save*. If it did, attack *would* be
salvation, and this is the *ego's* interpretation, *no* God's. Only the
world of guilt could demand this, for only the guilty could *conceive*
of it. Adam's "sin" could have touched none of you, had you not believed
that it was the *Father* Who drove him out of paradise. For in that
belief, the knowledge of the Father was lost, since only those who do
*not* understand Him *could* believe it.

^88^ This world *is* a picture of the crucifixion of God's Son. And
until you realize that God's Son cannot *be* crucified, this is the
world you will see. Yet you will not realize this until you accept the
eternal fact that God's Son is *not guilty*. He *deserves* only love
because he has *given* only love. He cannot *be* condemned because he
has never condemned. The Atonement is the final lesson he need learn,
for it teaches him that, never having sinned, he has no *need* of
salvation.

^89^ Long ago we said that the Holy Spirit shares the goal of all good
teachers, whose ultimate aim is to make themselves unnecessary by
teaching their pupils all they know. The Holy Spirit wills *only* this,
for sharing the Father's love for His Son, He wills to remove *all*
guilt from his mind that he may remember his Father in peace. For peace
and guilt are antithetical, and the Father can be remembered *only* in
peace. Love and guilt cannot coexist, and to accept one is to *deny* the
other. Guilt hides Christ from your sight, for it is the denial of the
blamelessness of God's Son.

^90^ In this strange world which you have made, the Son of God *has*
sinned. How could you *see* him, then? By making him invisible, the
world of retribution rose in the black cloud of guilt which you
accepted, and you hold it dear. For the blamelessness of Christ is the
proof that the ego never was and can never be. Without guilt the ego
*has* no life, and God's Son *is* without guilt. As you look upon
yourselves and judge what you do honestly, as you have been asked to do,
you may be tempted to wonder how you *can* be guiltless.

^91^ Yet consider this: You are not guiltless in time, but in
*eternity*. You *have* "sinned" in the past, but there *is* no past.
Always has *no* direction. Time seems to go in one direction, but when
you reach its end, it will roll up like a long carpet which has spread
along the past behind you and will disappear. As long as you believe the
Son of God is guilty, you will walk along this carpet, believing that it
leads to death. And the journey will seem long and cruel and senseless,
for so it *is*.

^92^ The journey which the Son of God has set himself is foolish indeed,
but the journey on which his Father sets him is one of release and joy.
The Father is *not* cruel, and His Son *cannot* hurt himself. The
retaliation he fears and which he *sees* will never touch him, for
although he believes in it, the Holy Spirit *knows* it is not true. The
Holy Spirit stands at the *end* of time, where *you* must be because He
is *with* you. He has *always* undone everything unworthy of the Son of
God, for such was His mission, given Him by God. And what God gives has
*always* been.

^93^ You will see me as you learn the Son of God is guiltless. He has
always sought his guiltlessness, and he has *found* it. For everyone is
seeking to escape from the prison he has made, and the way to find
release is not denied him. Being *in* him, he *has* found it. *When* he
finds it is only a matter of time, and time is but an illusion. For the
Son of God is guiltless *now*, and the brightness of his purity shines
untouched forever in God's Mind. God's Son will *always* be as he was
created. Deny *your* world and judge him not, for his eternal
guiltlessness is in the Mind of his Father, and protects him forever.

^94^ When you have accepted the Atonement for yourselves, you will
realize that there *is* no guilt in God's Son. And *only* as you look
upon him as guiltless can you understand his oneness. For the idea of
guilt brings a belief in condemnation of one by another, projecting
separation in place of unity. You can condemn only *yourself*, and by so
doing, you cannot know that you *are* God's Son. You have denied the
condition of his Being, which is his perfect blamelessness. Out of love
he was created, and in love he abides. Goodness and mercy have always
followed him, for he has always extended the love of his Father.

^95^ As you perceive the holy companions who travel with you, you will
realize that there *is* no journey, but only an awakening. The Son of
God, who sleepeth not, has kept faith with his Father *for* you. There
is no road to travel on and no time to travel through. For God waits not
for His Son in time, being forever unwilling to be without him. And so
it has always been. Let the holiness of God's Son shine away the cloud
of guilt that darkens your mind, and by accepting his purity as yours,
learn of him that it *is* yours.

^96^ You are invulnerable *because* you are guiltless. You can hold on
to the past *only* through guilt. For guilt establishes that you will be
punished for what you have done and thus depends on one-dimensional
time, proceeding from past to future. No one who believes this can
understand what *always* means. And therefore guilt *must* deprive you
of the appreciation of eternity. You are immortal *because* you are
eternal and always *must* be now. Guilt, then, is a way of holding past
and future in your minds to ensure the ego's continuity. For if what has
been *will* be punished, the ego's continuity is guaranteed. Yet the
guarantee of your continuity is God's, not the ego's. And immortality is
the opposite of time, for time passes away, while immortality is
constant.

^97^ Accepting the Atonement teaches you what immortality *is,* for by
accepting your guiltlessness, you learn that the past has never been,
and so the future is needless. The future, in time, is always associated
with expiation, and *only* guilt could induce a sense of *need* for
expiation. Accepting the guiltlessness of the Son of God as *yours* is
therefore God's way of reminding you of His Son and what he is in truth.
For God has never condemned His Son, and being guiltless, he *is*
eternal.

^98^ You cannot dispel guilt by making it real and *then* atoning for
it. This is the ego's plan, which it offers *instead* of dispelling it.
The ego believes in atonement through *attack*, being fully committed to
the insane notion that attack *is* salvation. And you who cherish guilt
must *also* believe it, for how else but by identifying *with* the ego
could you hold dear what you do not want?

^99^ The ego teaches you to attack yourself *because* you are guilty,
and this must *increase* the guilt, for guilt is the *result* of attack.
In the ego's teaching, then, there *is* no escape from guilt. For attack
makes guilt real, and if it is real, there *is* no way to overcome it.
The Holy Spirit dispels it simply through the calm recognition that it
has never been. As He looks upon the guiltless Son of God, he *knows*
this is true. And being true for *you*, you *cannot* attack yourself,
for without guilt, attack is impossible. You, then, *are* saved because
God's Son is guiltless. And being wholly pure, you *are* invulnerable.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Twelve**](#part0004.html#chap-12) {#part0017_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Problem of Guilt**](#part0004.html#chap-12) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-95) {#part0017_split_000.html#h1-95 .level1a1}

^12:1^ The ultimate purpose of projection, as the ego uses it, is
*always* to get rid of guilt. Yet, characteristically, the ego attempts
to get rid of guilt from *its* viewpoint only, for much as the ego wants
to retain guilt, *you* find it intolerable, since guilt stands in the
way of your remembering God, Whose pull is so strong that you *cannot*
resist it. On this issue, then, the deepest spilt of all occurs, for if
you are to retain guilt, as the ego insists, *you cannot be you*. Only
by persuading you that *it* is you could the ego possibly induce you to
project guilt and thereby *keep* it in your mind.

^2^ Yet consider how strange a solution the ego's arrangement is. You
project guilt to get rid of it, but you are actually merely concealing
it. You *do* experience guilt feelings, but you have no idea why. On the
contrary, you associate them with a weird assortment of ego ideals which
the ego claims you have failed. Yet you have no idea that you are
failing the Son of God by seeing him as guilty. Believing you are no
longer you, you do not realize that you are failing *yourself*.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Crucifixion by Guilt**](#part0004.html#level-96) {#part0017_split_001.html#h1-96 .level1a}

^3^ The darkest of your hidden cornerstones holds your belief in guilt
from your awareness. For in that dark and secret place is the
realization that you have betrayed God's Son by condemning him to death.
You do not even suspect this murderous but insane idea lies hidden
there, for the ego's destructive urge is so intense that nothing short
of the crucifixion of God's Son can ultimately satisfy it. It does not
know who the Son of God is because it is blind. Yet let it perceive
guiltlessness anywhere, and it will try to destroy it because it is
afraid.

^4^ Much of the ego's strange behavior is directly attributable to its
definition of guilt. To the ego, *the guiltless are guilty*. Those who
do not attack are its "enemies" because, by not valuing its
interpretation of salvation, they are in an excellent position *to let
it go*. They have approached the darkest and deepest cornerstone in the
ego's foundation, and while the ego can withstand your raising all else
to question, it guards this one secret with its life, for its existence
*does* depend on keeping this secret. So it is this secret that we must
look upon calmly, for the ego cannot protect you against truth, and in
*its* presence the ego is dispelled.

^5^ In the calm light of truth, let us recognize that you believe you
*have* crucified God's Son. You have not admitted to this "terrible"
secret because you *still* wish to crucify him if you could *find* him.
Yet the wish has hidden him from you because it is very fearful, and you
are *afraid* to find him. You have handled this wish to kill *yourself*
by *not knowing* who you are and identifying with something *else*. You
have projected guilt blindly and indiscriminately, but you have *not*
uncovered its source. For the ego *does* want to kill you, and if you
identify *with* it, you must believe *its* goal is *yours.*

^6^ We once said that the crucifixion is the symbol of the ego. When it
was confronted with the *real* guiltlessness of God's Son, it *did*
attempt to kill him, and the reason it gave was that guiltlessness is
blasphemous to God. To the ego *the ego* is god, and guiltlessness
*must* be interpreted as the final guilt which fully justifies murder.
You do not yet understand that all your fear of this course stems
ultimately from this interpretation, but if you will consider your
reactions to it, you will become increasingly convinced that this is so.

^7^ This course has explicitly stated that its goal for you is happiness
and peace. Yet you are *afraid* of it. You have been told again and
again that it will make you free, yet you react as if it is trying to
imprison you. Most of the time you dismiss it, but you do *not* dismiss
the *ego's* thought system. You have *seen* its results and you *still*
lack faith in it. You *must*, then, believe that by *not* learning the
course, you are *protecting* yourself. And you do not realize that it is
only your guiltlessness which *can* protect you.

^8^ The Atonement has always been interpreted as the release from guilt,
and this is correct if it is understood. Yet even when I have
interpreted it *for* you, you have rejected it and have *not* accepted
it for yourself. You have recognized the futility of the ego and its
offerings, but though you do not want the ego, you do not look upon the
alternative with gladness. You are *afraid* of redemption, and you
believe it will kill you. Make no mistake about the depth of your fear.
For you believe that in the presence of truth you will turn on yourself
and destroy yourself.

^9^ Little children, this is not so. Your "guilty secret" is nothing,
and if you will but bring it to the light, the light will dispel it. And
then no dark cloud will remain between you and the remembrance of your
Father, for you will remember His guiltless Son, who did not die,
because he is immortal. And you will see that you were redeemed *with*
him and have never been separated *from* him. In this understanding lies
your remembering, for it is the recognition of love *without* fear.
There will be great joy in Heaven on your homecoming, and the joy will
be *yours*. For the redeemed son of man *is* the guiltless Son of God,
and to recognize him *is* your redemption.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Fear of Redemption**](#part0004.html#level-97) {#part0017_split_002.html#h1-97 .level1a}

^10^ You may wonder why it is so crucial that you look upon your hatred
and realize its full extent. You may also think that it would be easy
enough for the Holy Spirit to show it to you and dispel it, *without*
the need for you to raise it to awareness yourself. Yet there is one
more complication which you have interposed between yourself and the
Atonement, which you do not yet realize. We have said that no one will
countenance fear if he *recognizes* it. Yet in your disordered state,
you are *not* afraid of fear. You do not like it, but it is not your
desire to attack which *really* frightens you. You are not seriously
disturbed by your hostility. You keep it hidden because you are *more*
afraid of what it covers.

^11^ You could look even upon the ego's darkest cornerstone *without*
fear if you did not believe that, *without* the ego, you would find
within yourself something you fear even more. You are *not* afraid of
crucifixion. Your real terror is of *redemption.* Under the ego's dark
foundation is the memory of God, and it is of *this* that you are really
afraid. For this memory would *instantly* restore you to your proper
place, and it is this place that you have sought to *leave.*

^12^ Your fear of attack is nothing compared to your fear of love. You
would be willing to look even upon your savage wish to kill God's Son if
you did not believe that it *saves* you from love. For this wish
*caused* the separation. You have protected it because you do not *want*
the separation healed, and you realize that, by *removing* the dark
cloud that obscures it, your love for your Father would impel you to
answer His call and leap into Heaven. You believe that attack is
salvation to prevent you from *this.* For still deeper than the ego's
foundation, and much stronger than it will ever be, is your intense and
burning love of God, and His for you. This is what you *really* want to
hide.

^13^ In honesty, is it not harder for you to say "I love" than "I hate"?
You associate love with weakness and hatred with strength, and your own
*real* power seems to you as your real *weakness.* For you could not
control your joyous response to the call of love if you heard it, and
the whole world you think you control *would* vanish. The Holy Spirit,
then, seems to be attacking your fortress, for you would shut out God,
and He does not will to *be* excluded.

^14^ You have built your whole insane belief system because you think
you would be helpless in God's Presence, and you would *save* yourself
from His love because you think it would crush you into nothingness. You
are afraid it would sweep you away from yourself, and make you little.
For you believe that magnitude lies in defiance and that attack is
grandeur. You think you have made a world which God would destroy; and
by loving Him, which you *do,* you would throw this world away, which
you *would*. Therefore, you have used the world to *cover* your love,
and the deeper you go into the blackness of the ego's foundation, the
closer you come to the love that is hidden there. *And it is this that
frightens you.*

^15^ You can accept insanity because you made it, but you cannot accept
love because you did *not*. You would rather be slaves of the
crucifixion than Sons of God in redemption. For your *individual* death
is more valued than your living oneness, and what is *given* you is not
so dear as what *you* made. You are more afraid of God than of the ego,
and love cannot enter where it is not welcome. But hatred can, for it
enters of *its* will and cares not for yours.

^16^ The reason you must look upon your delusions and not keep them
hidden is that they do *not* rest on their own foundation. In
concealment they appear to do so, and thus they *seem* to be
self-sustained. This is the fundamental illusion on which they rest. For
*beneath* them and concealed as long as *they* are hidden is the loving
mind that *thought* it made them in anger. And the pain in this mind is
so apparent when it is uncovered that its need of healing cannot *be*
denied. Not all the tricks and games you offer it can heal it, for here
is the *real* crucifixion of God's Son.

^17^ And yet he is *not* crucified. Here is both his pain *and* his
healing, for the Holy Spirit's vision is merciful, and His remedy is
quick. Do not *hide* suffering from His sight, but bring it gladly to
Him. Lay before His eternal sanity *all* your hurt, and *let* Him heal
you. Do not leave any spot of pain hidden from His light, and search
your minds carefully for any thoughts which you may fear to uncover. For
He will heal every little thought which you have kept to hurt you and
cleanse it of its littleness, restoring it to the magnitude of God.

^18^ Beneath all your grandiosity, which you hold so dear, is your real
call for help. For you call for love to your Father as your Father calls
you to Himself. In that place which you have hidden, you will only to
unite with the Father in loving remembrance of Him. You will find this
place of truth as you see it in your brothers, for though they may
deceive themselves, like you they long for the grandeur that is in them.
And perceiving it you will welcome it, and it will be *yours*. For
grandeur is the *right* of God's Son, and *no* illusions can satisfy him
or save him from what he *is.* Only his love is real, and he will be
content *only* with his reality.

^19^ Save him from his illusions that you may accept the magnitude of
your Father in peace and joy. But exempt no one from your love, or you
will be hiding a dark place in your mind where the Holy Spirit is not
welcome. And you will exempt *yourself* from His healing power, for by
not offering total love, you will not be healed completely. Healing must
be as complete as fear, for love cannot enter where there is one spot of
fear to mar its welcome.

^20^ You who prefer specialness to sanity could not obtain it in your
right minds. You were at peace until you asked for special favor. And
God did not give it, for the request was alien to Him, and you could not
ask this of a Father Who truly loved His Son. Therefore you made of Him
an unloving father, demanding of Him what only such a father could give.
And the peace of God's Son was shattered, for he no longer understood
his Father. He feared what he had made, but still more did he fear his
*real* Father, having attacked his own glorious equality with Him.

^21^ In peace he needed nothing and asked for nothing. In war he
*demanded* everything and *found* nothing. For how could the gentleness
of love respond to his demands *except* by departing in peace and
returning to the Father? If the Son did not wish to remain in peace, he
could not remain at all. For a darkened mind cannot live in the light,
and it must seek a place of darkness where it can believe it is where it
is not. God did not allow this to happen.Yet you *demanded* that it
happen and therefore believed that it was so.

^22^ To "single out" is to "make alone" and thus *make lonely*. God did
not do this to you. Could He set you apart, *knowing* that your peace
lies in His Oneness? He denied you only your request for pain, for
suffering is not of His creation. Having *given* you creation, He could
not take it *from* you. He could but answer your insane request with a
sane answer which would abide with you in your insanity. \[And this He
did. No one who hears His answer but will give up insanity.\] For His
answer is the reference point *beyond* illusions from which you can look
back on them and *see* them as insane. But seek *this* place, and you
*will* find it, for love is in you and will lead you there.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Healing and Time**](#part0004.html#level-98) {#part0017_split_003.html#h1-98 .level1a}

^23^ And now the reason why you are afraid of this course should be
apparent. For this is a course on love because it is about *you*. You
have been told that your function in this world is healing, and your
function in Heaven is creating. The ego teaches that your function on
earth is destruction and that you have no function at all in Heaven. It
would thus destroy you here and bury you here, leaving you no
inheritance except the dust out of which it thinks you were made. As
long as it is reasonably satisfied with you, as its reasoning goes, it
offers you oblivion. When it becomes overtly savage, it offers you hell.

^24^ Yet neither oblivion nor hell is as unacceptable to you as Heaven.
For your definition of Heaven *is* hell and oblivion, and the *real*
Heaven is the greatest threat you think you could experience. For hell
and oblivion are ideas which *you* made up, and you are bent on
demonstrating their reality to establish *yours*. If *their* reality is
questioned, you believe that *yours* is. For you believe that *attack*
is your reality and that your destruction is the final proof that you
were *right*.

^25^ Under the circumstances, would it not be more *desirable* to have
been wrong, even apart from the fact that you *were* wrong? While it
could perhaps be argued that death suggests there *was* life, no one
would claim that it proves there *is* life. Even the past life which
death might indicate could only have been futile if it must come to this
and *needs* this to prove that it was. You question Heaven, but you do
not question *this*. You could heal and be healed if you *did* question
it. And even though you know not Heaven, might it not be more desirable
than death? You have been as selective in your questioning as in your
perception. An open mind is more honest than this.

^26^ The ego has a very strange notion of time, and it is with this
notion that your questioning might well begin. The ego invests heavily
in the past and in the end believes that the past is the *only* aspect
of time that is meaningful. You will remember that we said its emphasis
on guilt enables it to ensure its continuity by making the future *like*
the past and thus avoiding the present. By the notion of *paying* for
the past in the future, the past becomes the *determiner* of the future,
making them continuous *without* an intervening present. For the ego
uses the present *only* as a brief transition to the future, in which it
brings the past *to* the future by interpreting the present in *past*
terms.

^27^ *Now* has no meaning to the ego. The present merely reminds it of
past hurts, and it reacts to the present as if it *were* the past. The
ego cannot tolerate *release* from the past, and although the past is no
more, the ego tries to preserve its image by responding *as if* it were
present. Thus it dictates reactions to those you meet now from a *past*
reference point, obscuring their present reality. In effect, if you
follow the ego's dictates, you will react to your brothers as though
they were someone *else*, and this will surely prevent you from
perceiving them as they *are*. And you will receive messages from them
out of your *own* past because, by making it real in the present, you
are forbidding yourself to *let it go.* You thus deny yourself the
message of release that every brother offers you *now*.

^28^ The shadowy figures from the past are precisely what you must
*escape*. For they are not real and have no hold over you unless you
bring them *with* you. They carry the spots of pain in your minds,
directing you to attack in the present in retaliation for a past that is
no more. And this decision is one of *future* pain. Unless you learn
that past pain is delusional, you are choosing a future of illusions and
losing the endless opportunities which you could find for release in the
present. The ego would *preserve* your nightmares and *prevent* you from
awakening and understanding that they *are* past.

^29^ Would you *recognize* a holy encounter if you are merely perceiving
it as a meeting with your own past? For you are meeting no one, and the
*sharing* of salvation, which *makes* the encounter holy, is excluded
from your sight. The Holy Spirit teaches that you always meet *yourself*
and the encounter is holy because *you* are. The ego teaches that you
always encounter your past, and because your dreams *were* not holy, the
future *cannot* be, and the present is without meaning. It is evident
that the Holy Spirit's perception of time is the exact opposite of the
ego's. The reason is equally clear, for they perceive the goal of time
as diametrically opposed.

^30^ The Holy Spirit interprets time's purpose as rendering the need for
it unnecessary. Thus does He regard the function of time as temporary,
serving only His teaching function, which is temporary by definition.
*His* emphasis is therefore on the only aspect of time which *can*
extend to the infinite, for *now* is the closest approximation of
eternity which this world offers. It is in the *reality* of now, without
past *or* future, that the beginning of the appreciation of eternity
lies. For only now is *here,* and *it* presents the opportunities for
the holy encounters in which salvation can be found.

^31^ The ego, on the other hand, regards the function of time as one of
extending itself *in place* of eternity, for like the Holy Spirit, the
ego interprets the goal of time as its own. The continuity of past and
future under *its* direction is the only purpose the ego perceives in
time, and it closes over the present so that no gap in its *own*
continuity can occur. *Its* continuity, then, would *keep* you in time,
while the Holy Spirit would release you *from* it. It is *His*
interpretation of the means of salvation which you must learn to accept
if you would share His goal of salvation for you.

^32^ You too will interpret the function of time as you interpret yours.
If you accept your function in the world of time as healing, you will
emphasize *only* the aspect of time in which healing can occur. For
healing *cannot* be accomplished in the past and *must* be accomplished
in the present to release the *future.* This interpretation ties the
future to the *present* and extends the present rather than the past.
But if you interpret your function as destruction, you will lose sight
of the present and hold on to the past to *ensure* a destructive future.
And time *will* be as you interpret it, for of itself it is *nothing*.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Two Emotions**](#part0004.html#level-99) {#part0017_split_004.html#h1-99 .level1a}

^33^ We have said that you have but two emotions, love and fear. One is
changeless but continually exchanged, being offered *by* the eternal
*to* the eternal. In this exchange it is extended, for it *increases* as
it is given. The other has many forms, for the content of individual
illusions differs greatly. Yet they have one thing in common---they are
all insane. They are made of sights which are *not* seen and sounds
which are *not* heard. They make up a private world which *cannot* be
shared. For they are meaningful *only* to their maker, and so they have
no meaning at all. In this world their maker moves alone, for only he
perceives them.

^34^ Each one peoples his world with figures from his individual past,
and it is because of this that private worlds *do* differ. Yet the
figures that he sees were *never* real, for they are made up only of
*his* reactions to his brothers and do not include their reactions to
*him*. Therefore he does not *see* that he made them and that they are
not whole. For these figures have no witnesses, being perceived in one
separate mind only.

^35^ It is *through* these strange and shadowy figures that the insane
relate to their insane world. For they see *only* those who remind them
of these images, and it is to *them* that they relate. Thus do they
communicate with those who are not there, and it is *they* who answer
them, and no one hears their answer save him who called upon them, and
he alone believes they answered him. Projection makes perception, and
you *cannot* see beyond it. Again and again have men attacked each other
because they saw in them a shadow figure in their *own* private world.
And thus it is that you *must* attack yourself first, for what you
attack is *not* in others. Its only reality is in your *own* mind, and
by attacking others, you are literally attacking what is *not there.*

^36^ The delusional can be very destructive, for they do not recognize
that they have condemned *themselves*. They do not wish to die, yet they
will not let condemnation *go.* And so they separate into their private
worlds, where everything is disordered and where what is within appears
to be without. Yet what *is* within they do not see, for the *reality*
of their brothers they *cannot* see.

^37^ You have but two emotions, yet in your private world you react to
each of them as though it were the *other*. For love cannot abide in a
world apart, where when it comes it is not recognized. If you see your
own hatred *as* your brother, you are not seeing *him.* Everyone draws
nigh unto what he loves and recoils from what he fears. And you react
with fear to love and draw away from it. Yet fear *attracts* you, and
believing it *is* love, you call it to yourself. Your private world is
filled with the figures of fear you have invited into it, and all the
love your brothers offer you, *you do not see*. As you look with open
eyes upon your world, it *must* occur to you that you have withdrawn
into insanity.

^38^ You see what is not there, and you hear what is soundless. Your
behavioral manifestations of emotions are the *opposite* of what the
emotions are. You communicate with no one, and you are as isolated from
reality as if you were alone in all the universe. In your madness, you
overlook reality *completely,* and you see only your *own* split mind
everywhere you look. God calls you and you do not hear, for you are
preoccupied with your own voice. And the vision of Christ is not in your
sight, for you look upon yourself *alone*.

^39^ Little children, would you offer *this* to your Father? For if you
offer it to yourself, you *are* offering it to Him. And He will *not*
return it, for it is unworthy of you because it is unworthy of Him. Yet
He *would* release you from it and set you free. His sane answer tells
you that what you have offered yourself is not true, but *His* offering
to you has never changed. You who know not what you do *can* learn what
insanity is and look beyond it. It is given you to learn how to *deny*
insanity and come forth from your private world in peace.

^40^ You will see all that you denied in your brothers *because* you
denied it in yourself. For you will love them, and by drawing nigh unto
them, you will draw them to yourself, perceiving them as witnesses to
your reality, which you share with God. I am with *them* as I am with
*you*, and we will draw them from their private worlds, for as we are
united, so would we unite with them. The Father welcomes all of us in
gladness, and gladness is what *we* should offer *Him*. For every Son of
God is given you to whom God gave *Himself.* And it is God Whom you must
offer them to recognize His gift to *you*.

^41^ Vision depends on light, and you cannot see in darkness. Yet in the
darkness in the private world of sleep, you *see* in dreams, although
your eyes are closed. And it is here that what you see you *made.* But
let the darkness go, and all you made you will no longer see, for sight
of it depends upon *denying* vision. Yet from denying vision, it does
not follow that you *cannot* see. But this is what denial *does*, for by
it you *accept* insanity, believing you can make a private world and
rule your *own* perceptions. Yet for this, light *must* be excluded.
Dreams disappear when light has come and you can *see*.

^42^ Do not seek vision through *your* eyes, for you *made* your way of
seeing that you might see in darkness, and in this you are deceived.
*Beyond* this darkness and yet still *within* you is the vision of
Christ, Who looks on all in light. Your vision comes from fear, as His
from love. And He sees *for* you as your witness to the real world. He
is the Holy Spirit's manifestation, looking always on the real world and
calling forth its witnesses and drawing them unto *you*. For He loves
what He sees within you, and He would *extend* it. And He will not
return unto the Father until He has extended your perception even unto
Him. And there perception is no more, for He has returned you to the
Father with Him.

^43^ You have but two emotions, and one you made and one was given you.
Each is a *way of seeing*, and different worlds arise from their
different visions. See through the vision that is given you, for through
Christ's vision He beholds Himself. And seeing what He is, He knows His
Father. Beyond your darkest dreams, He sees God's guiltless Son within
you, shining in perfect radiance, which is undimmed by your dreams. And
this *you* will see as you look with Him, for His vision is His gift of
love to you, given Him of the Father *for* you.

^44^ The Holy Spirit is the light in which Christ stands revealed. And
all who would behold Him can see Him, for they have *asked* for light.
Nor will they see Him *alone*, for He is no more alone than they are.
Because they saw the Son, they have risen in Him to the Father. And all
this will they understand because they looked within and saw beyond the
darkness the Christ in them and *recognized* Him. In the sanity of His
vision, they looked upon themselves with love, seeing themselves as the
Holy Spirit sees them. And *with* this vision of the truth in them came
all the beauty of the world to shine upon them.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Finding the Present**](#part0004.html#level-100) {#part0017_split_005.html#h1-100 .level1a}

^45^ To perceive truly is to be aware of *all* reality through the
awareness of your own. But for this *no* illusions can rise to meet your
sight, for *all* reality leaves no room for *any* error. This means that
you perceive a brother only as you see him *now*. His past has *no*
reality in the present, and you *cannot* see it. *Your* past reactions
to him are *also* not there, and if it is to them that you react *now*,
you see but an image of him which you made and cherish *instead* of him.
In your questioning of illusions, ask yourself if it is *really* sane to
perceive what *was now.* If you remember the past as you look upon your
brother, you will be unable to perceive the reality that is *now*.

^46^ You consider it "natural" to use your past experience as the
reference point from which to *judge* the present. Yet this is
*unnatural* because it is delusional. When you have learned to look upon
everyone with *no reference at all* to the past, either his or yours as
you perceived it, you will be able to learn from what you see *now*. For
the past can cast no shadow to darken the present *unless you are afraid
of light.* And only if you are would you choose to bring this darkness
*with* you, and by holding it in your minds, see it as a dark cloud that
shrouds your brothers and conceals their reality from your sight.

^47^ *This darkness is in you*. The Christ revealed to you *now* has no
past, for He is changeless, and in *His* changelessness lies *your*
release. For if He is as He was created, there is no guilt in Him. No
cloud of guilt has risen to obscure Him, and He stands revealed in
everyone you meet because you see Him through *Himself*. To be born
again is to *let the past go* and look without condemnation upon the
present. For the cloud which obscures God's Son to you *is* the past,
and if you would have it past *and gone*, you must not see it *now*. If
you see it now in your delusions, it has *not* gone from you, although
it is not there.

^48^ Time can release as well as imprison, depending on whose
interpretation of it you use. Past, present, and future are not
continuous unless you *force* continuity on them. You can *perceive*
them as continuous and make them so for *you.* But do not be deceived
and then believe that this is how it *is*, for to believe that reality
is what you would *have* it be according to your use for it *is*
delusional. You would destroy time's continuity by breaking it into
past, present and future *for your own purposes*. You would anticipate
the future on the basis of your past experience and plan for it
accordingly. Yet by doing so, you are *aligning* past and future and not
allowing the miracle, which could intervene *between* them, to free you
to be born again.

^49^ The miracle enables you to see your brother *without* his past and
so perceive *him* as born again. His errors *are* all past, and by
perceiving him without them, you are *releasing* him. And since his past
is *yours*, you *share* in this release. Let no dark cloud out of *your*
past obscure him from you, for truth lies *only* in the present, and you
will find it if you seek it there. You have looked for it where it is
*not* and therefore have not found it. Learn, then, to seek it where it
*is*, and it will dawn on eyes that see. Your past was made in anger,
and if you use it to attack the present, you will not *see* the freedom
that the present holds. Judgment and condemnation are *behind* you, and
unless you bring them *with* you, you will see that you *are* free of
them.

^50^ Look lovingly upon the present, for it holds the *only* things that
are forever true. All healing lies within it because *its* continuity is
real. It extends to all aspects of consciousness *at the same time* and
thus enables them to reach *each other.* The present is before time was
and will be when time is no more. In it is everything that is eternal,
and they are one. Their continuity is timeless, and their communication
is unbroken, for they are not separated by the past. Only the past *can*
separate, and *it* is nowhere.

^51^ The present offers you your brothers in the light that would unite
you with them and free you *from* the past. Would you, then, hold the
past *against* them? For if you do, you are choosing to remain in the
darkness that is not there and refusing to accept the light that is
offered you. For the light of perfect vision is freely given as it is
freely received and can be accepted only *without limit*. In this one
still dimension of time, which does not change and where there is no
sight of what you were, you look at Christ and call His witnesses to
shine on you *because you called them forth*. And *they* will not deny
the truth in you because you looked for it in them and *found* it there.

^52^ Now is the time of salvation, for now is the *release* from time.
Reach out to all your brothers, and touch them with the touch of Christ.
In timeless union with them is *your* continuity, unbroken because it is
wholly shared. God's guiltless Son is *only* light. There is no darkness
in him anywhere, for he is whole. Call all your brothers to witness to
his wholeness, as I am calling you to join with me. Every voice has a
part in the song of redemption, the hymn of gladness and thanksgiving
for the light to the Creator of light. The holy light that shines forth
from God's Son is the witness that his light is of his Father.

^53^ Shine on your brothers in remembrance of your Creator, for you will
remember Him as you call forth the witnesses to His creation. Those whom
you heal bear witness to *your* healing, for in their wholeness you will
see your own. And as your hymns of praise and gladness rise to your
Creator, He will return your thanks in His clear answer to your call.
For it can never be that His Son called upon Him and remained
unanswered. His call to you is but your call to Him. And *in* Him you
are answered by His peace.

^54^ Children of light, you know not that the light is in you. Yet you
will find it through its witnesses, for having *given* light to them,
they will *return* it. Everyone you see in light brings *your* light
closer to your *own* awareness. Love always leads to love. The sick, who
ask for love, are grateful for it, and in their joy they shine with holy
thanks. And this they offer you, who *gave* them joy. They are your
guides to joy, for having received it of you, they would keep it. You
have established them as guides to peace, for you have made it manifest
in them. And *seeing* it, its beauty calls *you* home.

^55^ There is a light which this world cannot give. Yet *you* can give
it, as it was given you. And as you give it, it shines forth to call you
from the world and follow it. For this light will attract you as nothing
in this world can do. And you will lay aside the world and find another.
This other world is bright with love, which *you* have given it. And
here will everything remind you of your Father and his Holy Son. Light
is unlimited and spreads across this world in quiet joy. All those you
brought with you will shine on you, and you will shine on them in
gratitude because they brought you here. Your light will join with
theirs in power so compelling that it will draw the others out of
darkness as you look on them.

^56^ Awakening unto Christ is following the laws of love of your free
will and out of quiet recognition of the truth in them. The attraction
of light must draw you willingly, and willingness is signified by
*giving.* Those who accept love of you become your willing witnesses to
the love you gave them, and it is *they* who hold it out to *you*. In
sleep you are alone, and your awareness is narrowed to yourself. And
that is why the nightmares come. You dream of isolation *because* your
eyes are closed. You do not *see* your brothers, and in the darkness you
cannot look upon the light you gave to them.

^57^ And yet the laws of love are not suspended because you sleep. And
you have followed them through all your nightmares and have been
faithful in your giving, for you were *not* alone. Even in sleep has
Christ protected you, ensuring the real world for you when you wake. In
*your* name He has given *for* you and given *you* the gifts He gave.
God's Son is still as loving as his Father. Continuous *with* his
Father, he has no past apart from Him. So he has never ceased to be his
Father's witness *and his own*. Although he slept, Christ's vision did
not leave him. And so it is that he can call unto himself the witnesses
that teach him that he never slept.
:::

[]{#part0017_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Attainment of the Real World**](#part0004.html#level-101) {#part0017_split_006.html#h1-101 .level1a}

^58^ Sit quietly and look upon the world you see, and tell yourself,

^59^ The real world is not like this. It has no buildings, and\
there are no streets where people walk alone and separate.\
There are no stores where people buy an endless list of\
things they do not need. It is not lit with artificial light,\
and night comes not upon it. There is no day that brightens\
and grows dim. There is no loss. Nothing is there but shines,\
and shines forever.

^60^ The world *you* see must be *denied,* for sight of it is costing
you a different kind of vision. *You cannot see both worlds*, for each
of them involves a different kind of seeing and depends on what you
cherish. The sight of one is possible *because* you have denied the
other. Both are not true, yet either one will seem as real to you as the
amount to which you hold it dear. And yet their power is *not* the same
because their real attraction to you is unequal.

^61^ You do not really want the world you see, for it has disappointed
you since time began. The homes you built have never sheltered you. The
roads you made have led you nowhere, and no city that you built has
withstood the crumbling assault of time. Nothing you made but has the
mark of death upon it. Hold it not dear, for it is old and tired and
ready to return to dust even as you made it. This aching world has not
the power to touch the living world at all. You could not give it that,
and so although you turn in sadness from it, you cannot find in *it* the
road that leads away from it into another world.

^62^ Yet the real world has the power to touch you even here *because
you love it.* And what you call with love *will* come to you. Love
*always* answers, being unable to deny a call for help or not to hear
the cries of pain that rise to it from every part of this strange world
you made but do not want. The only effort you need make to give this
world away in glad exchange for what you did not make is willingness to
learn *the one you made is false.*

^63^ You *have* been wrong about the world because you have misjudged
*yourself*. From such a twisted reference point what *could* you see?
All vision starts *with the perceiver* who judges what is true and what
is false. And what he judges false *he does not see.* You who would
judge reality *cannot* see it, for whenever judgment enters, reality has
slipped away. The out of mind is out of sight because what is denied is
there but is not *recognized*. Christ is still there, although you know
Him not. His Being does not depend upon your recognition. He lives
within you in the quiet present and waits for you to leave the past
behind and enter into the world He holds out to you in love.

^64^ No one in this distracted world but has seen some glimpses of the
other world about him. Yet while he still lays value on his own, he will
*deny* the vision of the other world, maintaining that he loves what he
loves not and following not the road that love points out. Love leads so
gladly! And as you follow Him, you will rejoice that you have found His
company and learned of Him the joyful journey home. You wait but for
*yourself.* To give this sad world over and exchange your errors for the
peace of God is but *your* will. And Christ will *always* offer you the
Will of God in recognition that you share it with Him.

^65^ It is God's Will that nothing touch His Son except Himself, and
nothing else comes nigh unto him. He is as safe from pain as God
Himself, Who watches over him in everything. The world about him shines
with love because God placed him in Himself where pain is not and love
surrounds him without end or flaw. Disturbance of his peace can never
be. In perfect sanity he looks on love, for it is all about him and
within him. He *must* deny the world of pain the instant he perceives
the arms of love around him. And from this point of safety, he looks
quietly about him and recognizes that the world is one with him.

^66^ The peace of God passeth your understanding *only* in the past. Yet
here it *is*, and you can understand it *now*. God loves His Son
forever, and His Son *returns* his Father's love forever. The real world
is the way that leads you to remembrance of this one thing that is
wholly true and wholly *yours*. For all else you have lent yourself in
time, and it will fade. But this one thing is *always* yours, being the
gift of God unto His Son. Your *one* reality was given you, and by it
God created you as one with Him.

^67^ You will first dream of peace and then awaken to it. Your first
exchange of what you made for what you want is the exchange of
nightmares for the happy dreams of love. In these lie your true
perceptions, for the Holy Spirit corrects the world of dreams, where
*all* perception is. Knowledge needs no correction. Yet the dreams of
love lead *unto* knowledge. In them you see nothing fearful, and because
of this, they are the welcome that you *offer* knowledge. Love waits on
welcome, *not* on time, and the real world is but your welcome of what
always was. Therefore, the call of joy is in it, and your glad response
is your awakening to what you have not lost. Praise, then, the Father
for the perfect sanity of His most holy Son.

^68^ Your Father knoweth that you have need of nothing. In Heaven this
is so, for what could you need in eternity? In *your* world you *do*
need things because it is a world of scarcity in which you find yourself
*because* you are lacking. Yet *can* you find yourself in such a world?
Without the Holy Spirit, the answer would be no. Yet because of Him, the
answer is a joyous *yes*! As Mediator between the two worlds, He knows
what you have need of and what will not hurt you. Ownership is a
dangerous concept if it is left to you. The ego wants to *have* things
for salvation, for possession is its law. Possession for its *own* sake
is the ego's fundamental creed, a basic cornerstone in the churches that
it builds unto itself. And at *its* altar it demands you lay *all* of
the things it bids you get, leaving you no joy in them.

^69^ Everything that the ego tells you that you need will hurt you. For
although the ego urges you again and again to *get*, it leaves you
nothing, for what you get, it will *demand* of you. And even from the
very hands that grasped it, it will be wrenched and hurled into the
dust. For where the ego sees salvation, it sees *separation*, and so you
lose whatever you have gotten in its name. Therefore ask not of
yourselves what you need, for *you do not know* and your advice unto
yourself *will* hurt you. For what you think you need will merely serve
to tighten up your world *against* the light and render you unwilling to
question the value that this world can really hold for you.

^70^ Only the Holy Spirit *knows* what you need. For He will give you
all things that do not block the way to light. And what else *could* you
need? In time He gives you all the things that you need have and will
renew them as long as you have need of them. He will take nothing from
you as long as you have *any* need of it. And yet He knows that
everything you need is temporary and will but last until you step aside
from *all* your needs and learn that all of them *have been* fulfilled.
Therefore He has no investment in the things that He supplies except to
make certain that you will not use them on behalf of lingering in time.
He knows that you are not at home there, and He wills no delay to wait
upon your joyous homecoming.

^71^ Leave, then, your needs to Him. He will supply them with no
emphasis at all upon them. What comes to you of Him comes safely, for He
will ensure it never can become a dark spot, hidden in your mind and
kept to hurt you. Under His guidance, you will travel light and journey
lightly, for His sight is ever on the journey's end which is His goal.
God's Son is not a traveler through *outer* worlds. However holy his
perception may become, no world outside himself holds his inheritance.
Within himself he *has* no needs, for light needs nothing but to shine
in peace and from itself to let the rays extend in quiet to infinity.

^72^ Whenever you are tempted to undertake a foolish journey that would
lead *away* from light, remember what you really want and say,

^73^ The Holy Spirit leads me unto Christ,\
and where else would I go?\
What need have I but to awake in Him?

^74^ Then follow Him in joy, with faith that He will lead you safely
through all dangers to your peace of mind that this world sets before
you. Kneel not before the altars to sacrifice and seek not what you will
surely lose. Content yourselves with what you will as surely *keep* and
be not restless, for you undertake a quiet journey to the peace of God,
where He would have you be in quietness.

^75^ In me you have already overcome *every* temptation that would hold
you back. We walk together on the way to quietness that is the gift of
God. Hold me dear, for what except your brothers *can* you need? We will
restore to you the peace of mind that we must find *together.* The Holy
Spirit will teach you to awaken unto us and to yourself. This is the
only *real* need to be fulfilled in time. Salvation *from* the world
lies only here. My peace I *give* you. *Take* it of me in glad exchange
for all the world has offered but to take away. And we will spread it
like a veil of light across the world's sad face, in which we hide our
brothers *from* the world, and it from them.

^76^ We cannot sing redemption's hymn alone. My task is not completed
until I have lifted every voice with mine. And yet it is *not* mine, for
as it is my gift to you, so was it the Father's gift to me, given me
through His Spirit. The sound of it will banish sorrow from the mind of
God's most holy Son, where it cannot abide. Healing in time *is* needed,
for joy cannot establish its eternal reign where sorrow dwells. You
dwell not here, but in eternity. You travel but in dreams while safe at
home. Give thanks to every part of you that you have taught how to
*remember* you. Thus does the Son of God give thanks unto his Father for
his purity.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Thirteen**](#part0004.html#chap-13) {#part0018_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**From Perception to Knowledge**](#part0004.html#chap-13) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-102) {#part0018_split_000.html#h1-102 .level1a1}

^13:1^ All therapy is release from the past. That is why the Holy Spirit
is the only therapist. He teaches that the past does not exist, a fact
which belongs to the sphere of knowledge and which therefore no one in
the world knows. It would indeed be impossible to *be* in the world with
this knowledge. For the mind that knows this unequivocally knows also
that it dwells in eternity and utilizes no perception at all. It
therefore does not consider where it is because the concept "where" does
not mean anything to it. It knows that it is *everywhere*, just as it
*has everything*, and *forever*.

^2^ The very real difference between perception and knowledge becomes
quite apparent if you consider this: There is nothing partial about
knowledge. Every aspect is whole, and therefore no aspect is separate.
*You* are an aspect of knowledge, being in the Mind of God, Who *knows*
you. All knowledge must be yours, for in you *is* all knowledge.
Perception at its loftiest is never complete. Even the perception of the
Holy Spirit, as perfect as perception can be, is without meaning in
Heaven. Perception can reach everywhere under His guidance, for the
vision of Christ beholds everything in light. Yet no perception, however
holy, will last forever.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Role of Healing**](#part0004.html#level-103) {#part0018_split_001.html#h1-103 .level1a}

^3^ Perfect perception, then, has many elements in common with
knowledge, making transfer to it possible. Yet the last step must be
taken by God because the last step in your redemption, which seems to be
in the future, was accomplished by God in your creation. The separation
has not interrupted it. Creation cannot *be* interrupted. The separation
is merely a faulty formulation of reality with no effect at all. The
miracle, without a function in Heaven, *is* needful here. Aspects of
reality can still be seen, and they will replace aspects of *un*reality.
Aspects of reality can be seen in everything and everywhere. Yet only
God can gather them together by crowning them as one with the final gift
of eternity.

^4^ Apart from the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit has no function.
He is not separate from either, being in the mind of both and knowing
that Mind is one. He is a Thought of God, and God has given Him to you
because He has no Thoughts He does not share. His message speaks of
timelessness in time, and that is why Christ's vision looks on
everything with love. Yet even Christ's vision is not His reality. The
golden aspects of reality which spring to light under His loving gaze
are partial glimpses of the Heaven that lies *beyond* them.

^5^ This is the miracle of creation; *that it is one forever*. Every
miracle you offer to the Son of God is but the true perception of one
aspect of the whole. Though every aspect *is* the whole, you cannot know
this until you see that every aspect is the *same*, perceived in the
*same light* and *therefore* one. Everyone seen *without* the past thus
brings you nearer to the end of time by bringing healed and healing
sight into the darkness and enabling the world to see. For light must
come into the darkened world to make Christ's vision possible even here.
Help Him to give His gift of light to all who think they wander in the
darkness, and let Him gather them into His quiet sight that makes them
one.

^6^ They are all the same; all beautiful and equal in their holiness.
And He will offer them unto His Father as they were offered unto Him.
There is *one* miracle, as there is *one* reality. And every miracle you
do contains them all, as every aspect of reality you see blends quietly
into the One Reality of God. The only miracle that ever was is God's
most holy Son, created in the One Reality that is his Father. Christ's
vision is His gift to you. His Being is His Father's gift to Him.

^7^ Be you content with healing, for Christ's gift you *can* bestow, and
your Father's gift you *cannot* lose. Offer Christ's gift to everyone
and everywhere, for miracles offered the Son of God through the Holy
Spirit attune you to reality. The Holy Spirit knows your part in the
redemption and who are seeking you and where to find them. Knowledge is
far beyond your individual concern. You, who are part of it and all of
it, need only realize that it is of the Father, *not* of you. Your role
in the redemption leads you to it by reestablishing its oneness in your
minds.

^8^ When you have seen your brothers as yourself, you will be *released*
to knowledge, having learned to free yourself of Him Who knows of
freedom. Unite with me under the holy banner of His teaching, and as we
grow in strength, the power of God's Son will move in us, and we will
leave no one untouched and no one left alone. And suddenly time will be
over, and we will all unite in the eternity of God the Father. The holy
light you saw outside yourself in every miracle you offered to your
brothers will be *returned* to you. And *knowing* that the light is *in*
you, your creations will be there with you, as you are in your Father.

^9^ As miracles in this world join you to your brothers, so do your
creations establish your fatherhood in Heaven. *You* are the witnesses
to the Fatherhood of God, and He has given you the power to create the
witnesses to your fatherhood in Heaven. The miracle which God created is
perfect, as are the miracles which *you* created in His name. They need
no healing, nor do you when you know *them*.

^10^ Yet in this world, your perfection is unwitnessed. God knows it,
but *you* do not, and so you do not share His witness to it. Nor do you
witness unto Him, for reality is witnessed to as one. God waits your
witness to His Son and to Himself. The miracles you do on earth are
lifted up to Heaven and to Him. They witness to what you do not know,
and as they reach the gates of Heaven, God will open them. For never
would He leave His own beloved Son outside them and beyond Himself.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Shadow of Guilt**](#part0004.html#level-104) {#part0018_split_002.html#h1-104 .level1a}

^11^ Guilt remains the only thing that hides the Father, for guilt is
the attack upon His Son. The guilty *always* condemn, and having done
so, they *will* condemn, linking the future to the past as is the ego's
law. Fidelity unto this law lets no light in, for it *demands* fidelity
to darkness and *forbids* awakening. The ego's laws are strict, and
breaches are severely punished. Therefore give no obedience to its laws,
for they are laws of punishment. And those who follow them believe that
they are guilty, and so they *must* condemn. Between the future and the
past, the laws of God must intervene if you would free yourselves.
Atonement stands between them like a lamp that shines so brightly that
the chain of darkness in which you bound yourselves will disappear.

^12^ Release from guilt is the ego's whole undoing. *Make no one
fearful*, for his guilt is yours, and by obeying the ego's harsh
commandments, you bring its condemnation of yourself, and you will not
escape the punishment it offers those who obey it. The ego rewards
fidelity to it with pain, for faith in it *is* pain. And faith can be
rewarded only in terms of the belief in which the faith was placed.
Faith *makes* the power of belief, and where it is invested determines
its reward. For faith is *always* given what is treasured, and what is
treasured *is* returned to you.

^13^ The world can give you only what you gave it, for being nothing but
your own projection, it *has* no meaning apart from what you found in it
and placed your faith in. Be faithful unto darkness and you will *not*
see, because your faith will be rewarded as you *gave* it. You will
accept your treasure, and if you place your faith in the past, the
future *will* be like it. Whatever you hold as dear, you think is
*yours.* The power of your *valuing* will make it so.

^14^ Atonement brings a re-evaluation of everything you cherish, for it
is the means by which the Holy Spirit can separate the false and the
true, which you have accepted into your minds *without distinction.*
Therefore, *you* cannot value one without the other, and guilt has
become as true *for you* as innocence. You do not believe the Son of God
is guiltless because you see the past and see *him* not. When you
condemn a brother, you are saying, "I who was guilty choose to *remain*
so." You have denied *his* freedom, and by so doing you have denied the
witness unto *yours.* You could as easily have *freed* him from the past
and lifted from his mind the cloud of guilt that binds him to it. And in
*his* freedom would have been your *own.*

^15^ Lay not his guilt upon him, for his guilt lies in his secret that
he thinks that he has done this unto *you*. Would you, then, teach him
that he is *right* in his delusion? The idea that the guiltless Son of
God can attack himself and *make* himself guilty is insane. In *any*
form, in *anyone*, *believe this not*. For sin and condemnation are the
same, and the belief in one is faith in the other, calling for
punishment *instead* of love. *Nothing* can justify insanity, and to
call for punishment upon yourself *must* be insane.

^16^ See no one, then, as guilty, and you will affirm the truth of
guiltlessness unto *yourself*. In every condemnation that you offer the
Son of God lies the conviction of your *own* guilt. If you would have
the Holy Spirit make you free of it, accept His offer of Atonement for
all your brothers. For so you learn that it is true for *you*. Remember
always that it is impossible to condemn the Son of God *in part*. Those
whom you see as guilty become the witnesses to guilt in *you*, and you
will *see* it there, for it *is* there until it is undone. Guilt is
*always* in your own mind, which has condemned *itself*. Project it not,
for while you do, it cannot *be* undone. With everyone whom you release
from guilt, great is the joy in Heaven, where the witnesses to your
fatherhood rejoice.

^17^ Guilt makes you blind, for while you see one spot of guilt within
you, you will *not* see the light. And by projecting it, the *world*
seems dark and shrouded in your guilt. You throw a dark veil over it and
cannot see it *because you cannot look within.* You are afraid of what
you would see there, but it is *not* there. *The thing you fear is
gone*. If you would look within, you would see only the Atonement,
shining in quiet and in peace upon the altar to your Father.

^18^ Do not be afraid to look within. The ego tells you all is black
with guilt within you and bids you *not* to look. Instead, it bids you
look upon your brothers *and see the guilt in them.* Yet this you cannot
do without remaining blind. For those who see their brothers in the
dark, and guilty in the dark in which they shroud them, are too afraid
to look upon the light within. Within you is not what *you* believe is
there and what you put your faith in.

^19^ Within you is the holy sign of perfect faith your Father has in
you. He does not value you as you do. He knows Himself and knows the
truth in *you.* He knows *there is no difference*, for He knows not of
differences. Can *you* see guilt where God *knows* there is perfect
innocence? You can *deny* His knowledge, but you cannot *change* it.
Look, then, upon the light He placed within you and learn that what you
feared was there *has been* replaced with love.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Release and Restoration**](#part0004.html#level-105) {#part0018_split_003.html#h1-105 .level1a}

^20^ You are accustomed to the notion that the mind can see the source
of pain where it is not. The doubtful service of displacement is to hide
the *real* source of your guilt and *keep* from your awareness the full
perception *that it is insane*. Displacement always is maintained by the
illusion that the source, from which attention is diverted, must be
*true and must be fearful*, or you would not have displaced the guilt
onto what you believed to be *less* fearful. You are therefore willing
with little opposition to look upon all sorts of "sources" underneath
awareness, provided that they are not the deeper source to which they
bear no real relationship at all.

^21^ Insane ideas *have* no real relationships, for that is *why* they
are insane. No real relationship can rest on guilt or even hold one spot
of it to mar its purity. For all relationships which guilt has touched
are used but to avoid the person *and* the guilt. What strange
relationships you have made for this strange purpose! And you forgot
that real relationships are holy and cannot be used by *you* at all.
They are used only by the Holy Spirit, and it is that which *makes* them
pure. For by preempting for your *own* ends what you should have given
to *Him*, He cannot use them unto *your* release. No one who would unite
in *any* way with *anyone* for his *own* salvation will find it in that
strange relationship. It is not shared, and so it is not real.

^22^ In any union with a brother in which you seek to lay your guilt
upon him or share it with him or perceive his own, you *will* feel
guilty. Nor will you find satisfaction and peace with him, because your
union with him is *not* real. You will see guilt in that relationship
because you *put* it there. It is inevitable that those who suffer guilt
*will* attempt to displace it, because they *do* believe in it. Yet,
though they suffer, they will not look within and let it *go*. They
cannot know they love and cannot understand what loving *is*. Their main
concern is to perceive the source of guilt outside themselves, *beyond*
their own control.

^23^ When you maintain that you are guilty but the source lies in the
*past*, you are *not* looking inward. The past is not *in* you. Your
weird associations to it have no meaning in the present. Yet you let
them stand between you and your brothers, with whom you find no *real*
relationships at all. Can you expect to use your brothers as a means to
"solve" the past and still to see them as they really are? Salvation is
not found by those who use their brothers to resolve problems which are
not there. You wanted not salvation in the past. Would you impose your
idle wishes on the present and hope to find salvation *now*?

^24^ Determine, then, to be not as you were. Use no relationship to hold
you to the past, but with each one each day be born again. A minute,
even less, will be enough to free you from the past and give your mind
in peace over to the Atonement. When everyone is welcome to you as you
would have yourself be welcome to your Father, you will see no guilt in
you. For you will have accepted the Atonement, which shone within you
all the while you dreamed of guilt and would not look within and see it.

^25^ As long as you believe that guilt is justified in *any* way in
*anyone whatever* he may do, you will not look within, where you would
*always* find Atonement. The end of guilt will never come as long as you
believe there is a *reason* for it. For you must learn that guilt is
*always* totally insane and *has* no reason. The Holy Spirit seeks not
to dispel reality. If *guilt* were real, *Atonement* would not be. The
purpose of Atonement is to dispel illusions, not to establish them as
real and *then* forgive them.

^26^ The Holy Spirit does not keep illusions in your mind to frighten
you and show them to you fearfully to demonstrate what He has saved you
*from*. What He has saved you from is *gone*. Give no reality to guilt,
and see *no* reason for it. The Holy Spirit does what God would have Him
do and has always done so. He has seen separation, but knows of union.
He teaches healing, but He also knows of creation. He would have you see
and teach as He does, and through Him. Yet what He knows, you do not
know, though it is yours.

^27^ *Now* it is given you to heal and teach, to make what will be
*now*. As yet it is *not* now. The Son of God believes that he is lost
in guilt, alone in a dark world where pain is pressing everywhere upon
him from *without*. When he has looked within and seen the radiance
there, he will remember how much his Father loves him. And it will seem
incredible that he has ever thought his Father loved him not and looked
upon him as condemned. The moment that you realize guilt is *insane,
wholly* unjustified, and *wholly* without reason, you will not fear to
look upon the Atonement and accept it wholly.

^28^ You who have been unmerciful unto yourselves do not remember your
Father's Love. And looking without mercy upon your brothers, you do not
remember how much you love *Him*. Yet it is forever true. In shining
peace within you is the perfect purity in which you were created. Fear
not to look upon the lovely truth in you. Look *through* the cloud of
guilt that dims your vision, and look *past* darkness to the holy place
where you will see the light. The altar to your Father is as pure as He
Who raised it to Himself. Nothing can keep from you what Christ would
have you see. His will is like His Father's, and He offers mercy to
every Child of God, as He would have *you* do.

^29^ *Release* from guilt as you would *be* released. There is no other
way to look within and see the light of love shining as steadily and as
surely as God Himself has always loved His Son. *And as his son loves
Him*. There is no fear in love, for love is guiltless. You who have
always loved your Father can have no fear for *any* reason to look
within and see your holiness. You cannot *be* as you believed you were.
Your guilt is without reason, because it is not in the Mind of God where
*you* are. And this *is* reason, which the Holy Spirit would *restore*
to you. He would remove only illusions. All else He would have you see.
And in Christ's vision, He would show you the perfect purity that is
forever within God's Son.

^30^ You cannot enter into *real* relationships with any of God's Sons
unless you love them all and *equally*. Love is not special. If you
single out *part* of the Sonship for your love, you are imposing guilt
on *all* your relationships and making them unreal. You can love *only*
as God loves. Seek not to love unlike Him, for there *is* no love apart
from His. Until you recognize that this is true, you will have no idea
what love is like. No one who condemns a brother can see himself as
guiltless in the peace of God. If he *is* guiltless and in peace and
sees it not, he *is* delusional and has not looked upon himself. To him
I say,

^31^ Behold the Son of God and look upon his purity and\
be still. In quiet look upon his holiness and offer thanks\
unto his Father that no guilt has ever touched him.

^32^ No illusion that you have ever held against him has touched his
innocence in any way. His shining purity, wholly untouched by guilt and
wholly loving, is bright within you. Let us look upon him together and
love him. For in our love of him is your guiltlessness. But look upon
yourself, and gladness and appreciation for what you see will banish
guilt forever. I thank You, Father, for the purity of Your most holy
Son, whom You have created guiltless forever.

^33^ Like you my faith and my belief are centered on what I treasure.
The difference is that I love *only* what God loves with me, and because
of this, I treasure you beyond the value that you set on yourselves,
even unto the worth that God has placed upon you. I love all that He
created, and all my faith and my belief I offer unto it. My faith in you
is strong as all the love I give my Father. My trust in you is without
limit and without the fear that you will hear me not. I thank the Father
for your loveliness and for the many gifts that you will let me offer to
the Kingdom in honor of its wholeness, which is of God.

^34^ Praise be unto you who make the Father one with His own Son. Alone
we are all lowly, but together we shine with brightness so intense that
none of us alone can even think on it. Before the glorious radiance of
the Kingdom, guilt melts away and, transformed into kindness, will never
more be what it was. Every reaction that you experience will be so
purified that it is fitting as a hymn of praise unto your Father. See
only praise of Him in what He has created, for He will never cease His
praise of *you*. United in this praise, we stand before the gates of
Heaven where we will surely enter in our blamelessness. God loves you.
Could I, then, lack faith in you and love Him perfectly?

^35^ Forgetfulness and sleep and even death become the ego's best advice
for how to deal with the perceived and harsh intrusion of guilt on
peace. Yet no one sees himself in conflict and ravaged by a cruel war
unless he believes that *both* opponents in the war are real. Believing
this, he must escape, for such a war would surely end his peace of mind
and so destroy him. Yet if he could but realize the war is between
forces that are real and *unreal* powers, he could look upon himself and
*see* his freedom. No one finds himself ravaged and torn in endless
battles which he *himself* perceives as wholly without meaning.

^36^ God would not have His Son embattled, and so His Son's imagined
"enemy," which he made, is *totally* unreal. You are but trying to
escape a bitter war from which you *have* escaped. The war is gone. For
you have heard the hymn of freedom rising unto Heaven. Gladness and joy
belong to God for your release, because you made it not. Yet as you made
not freedom, so you made not a war that could *endanger* freedom.
Nothing destructive ever was or will be. The war, the guilt, the past
are gone as one into the unreality from which they came.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Guarantee of Heaven**](#part0004.html#level-106) {#part0018_split_004.html#h1-106 .level1a}

^37^ When we are all united in Heaven, you will value *nothing* that you
value here. For nothing that you value here you value wholly, and so you
do not value it at all. Value is where God placed it, and the value of
what God esteems cannot *be* judged, for it has been *established*. It
is *wholly* of value. It can merely be appreciated or not. To value it
partially is not to *know* its value. In Heaven is everything God valued
and nothing else. Heaven is perfectly unambiguous. Everything is clear
and bright and calls forth *one* response. There is no darkness, and
there is no contrast. There is no variation. There is no interruption.
There is a sense of peace so deep that no dream in this world has ever
brought even a dim imagining of what it is.

^38^ Nothing in this world can give this peace, for nothing in this
world is wholly shared. Perfect perception can merely show you what is
*capable* of being wholly shared. It can also show you the *results* of
sharing while you still remember the results of *not* sharing. The Holy
Spirit points quietly to the contrast, knowing that you will finally let
Him judge the difference for you, allowing Him to demonstrate which
*must* be true. He has perfect faith in your final judgment because He
knows that He will make it *for* you. To doubt this would be to doubt
that His mission will be fulfilled. How is this possible, when His
mission is of God?

^39^ You whose minds are darkened by doubt and guilt, remember this: God
gave the Holy Spirit to you and gave Him the mission to remove all doubt
and every trace of guilt that His dear Son has laid upon himself. It is
*impossible* that this mission fail. Nothing can prevent what God would
have accomplished from accomplishment. Whatever your reactions to the
Holy Spirit's Voice may be, whatever voice you choose to listen to,
whatever strange thoughts may occur to you, God's will *is* done. You
*will* find the peace in which He has established you, because He does
not change His Mind. He is invariable as the peace in which you dwell
and of which the Holy Spirit reminds you.

^40^ You will not remember change and shift in Heaven. You have need of
contrast only here. Contrast and differences are necessary teaching
aids, for by them you learn what to avoid and what to seek. When you
have learned this, you will find the answer that makes the need for
*any* differences disappear. Truth comes of its own will unto its own.
When you have learned that you *belong* to truth, it will flow lightly
over you without a difference of any kind. For you will need no contrast
to help you realize that this is what you want, and *only* this. Fear
not the Holy Spirit will fail in what your Father has given Him to do.
The Will of God can fail in *nothing*.

^41^ Have faith in only this one thing, and it will be sufficient: God
wills you be in Heaven, and nothing can keep *you* from it or *it* from
you. Your wildest misperceptions, your weird imaginings, your blackest
nightmares all mean nothing. They will not prevail against the peace God
wills for you. The Holy Spirit will restore your sanity, because
insanity is *not* the Will of God. If that suffices Him, it is enough
for you. You will not keep what God would have removed, because it
breaks communication with you with whom He would communicate. His voice
*will* be heard.

^42^ The Communication Link which God Himself placed within you, joining
your minds with His, *cannot* be broken. You may believe you *want* it
broken, and this belief *does* interfere with the deep peace in which
the sweet and constant communication which God would share with you is
known. Yet His channels of reaching out cannot be wholly closed and
separated from Him. Peace will be yours, because His peace still flows
to you from Him Whose Will *is* peace. You have it *now.* The Holy
Spirit will teach you how to *use* it and, by projecting it, to learn
that it is in you.

^43^ God willed you Heaven and will *always* will you nothing else. The
Holy Spirit knows *only* of His Will. There is no chance that Heaven
will not be yours, for God is sure, and what He wills is as sure as He
is. You will learn salvation, because you will learn *how to save*. It
will not be possible to exempt yourself from what the Holy Spirit wills
to teach you. Salvation is as sure as God. His certainty suffices. Learn
that even the darkest nightmare that disturbed the mind of God's
sleeping Son holds no power over him. He *will* learn the lesson of
awaking. God watches over him, and light surrounds him.

^44^ Can God's Son lose himself in dreams when God has placed *within*
him the glad call to waken and be glad? He cannot separate *himself*
from what is *in* him. His sleep will not withstand the call to wake.
The mission of redemption will be fulfilled as surely as the creation
will remain unchanged throughout eternity. You do not have to know that
Heaven is yours to make it so. It *is* so. Yet the Will of God must be
accepted as *your* will to know it.

^45^ The Holy Spirit cannot fail to undo *for* you everything you have
learned that teaches you what is not true must be reconciled with truth.
This is the reconciliation which the ego would substitute for your
reconciliation unto sanity and unto peace. The Holy Spirit has a very
different kind of reconciliation in His Mind for you, and one which He
*will* effect as surely as the ego will *not* effect what it attempts.

^46^ Failure is of the ego, *not* of God. From Him you *cannot* wander,
and there is no possibility that the plan the Holy Spirit offers to
everyone for the salvation *of* everyone will not be perfectly
accomplished. You *will* be released, and you will not remember anything
you made that was not created *for* you and *by* you in return. For how
can you remember what was *never* true or *not* remember what has always
been? It is this reconciliation with truth, and *only* truth, in which
the peace of Heaven lies.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Testimony of Miracles**](#part0004.html#level-107) {#part0018_split_005.html#h1-107 .level1a}

^47^ Yes, you are blessed indeed. Yet in this world, you do not know it.
But you have the means for learning it and seeing it quite clearly. The
Holy Spirit uses logic as easily and as well, as does the ego, except
that His conclusions are *not* insane. They take a direction exactly
opposite, pointing as clearly to Heaven as the ego points to darkness
and to death. We have followed much of the ego's logic and have seen its
logical conclusions. And having seen them, we have realized that they
cannot be seen but in illusions, for there alone their seeming clearness
*seems* to be clearly seen. Let us now turn away from them and follow
the simple logic by which the Holy Spirit teaches you the simple
conclusions that speak for truth and *only* truth.

^48^ If you are blessed and do not know it, you need to *learn* it must
be so. The knowledge is not taught, but its *conditions* must be
acquired, for it is they that have been thrown away. You *can* learn to
bless and *cannot* give what you have not. If, then, you *offer*
blessing, it *must* have come first to yourself. And you must also have
*accepted* it as yours, for how else could you give it away?

^49^ That is why your miracles offer *you* the testimony that you are
blessed. If what you offer *is* complete forgiveness, you *must* have
let guilt go, accepting the Atonement for yourself and learning you are
guiltless. How could you learn what has been done for you, but which you
do not know, unless you do what you would *have* to do if it *had* been
done unto you? *In*direct proof of truth is needed in a world made of
denial and without direction. You will perceive the need for this if you
will realize that to deny is the decision *not* to know. The logic of
the world *must* therefore lead to nothing, for its *goal* is nothing.

^50^ If you decide to have and give and *be* nothing except a dream, you
*must* direct your thoughts unto oblivion. And if you have and give and
are *everything*, and all this has been *denied,* your thought system is
closed off and wholly separated from the truth. This *is* an insane
world, and do not underestimate the actual extent of its insanity. There
is no area of your perception that it has not touched, and your dream
*is* sacred to you. That is why God placed the Holy Spirit *in* you,
where you placed the dream.

^51^ Seeing is always *outward*. Were your thoughts wholly of *you*, the
thought system which you made would be forever dark. The thoughts which
the mind of God's Son projects have all the power that he gives to them.
The thoughts he shares with God are *beyond* his belief, but those he
made *are* his beliefs. And it is *these*, and *not* the truth, that he
has chosen to defend and love. They will not be taken from him. But they
can be *given up* by him, for the Source of their undoing is *in* him.
There is nothing *in* the world to teach him that the logic of the world
is totally insane and leads to nothing. Yet in him who made this insane
logic, there is One Who *knows* it leads to nothing, for He knows
everything.

^52^ Any direction which will lead you where the Holy Spirit leads you
not goes nowhere. Anything you deny which He knows to be true, you have
denied *yourself,* and He must therefore teach you *not* to deny it.
Undoing *is* indirect, as doing is. You were created only to *create*,
neither to see *nor* do. These are but indirect expressions of the will
to live, which has been blocked by the capricious and unholy whim of
death and murder that your Father shared not with you. You have set
yourselves the task of sharing what cannot *be* shared. And while you
think it possible to *learn* to do this, you will not believe all that
*is* possible to learn to do.

^53^ The Holy Spirit, therefore, must begin His teaching by showing you
what you can *never* learn. His *message* is not indirect, but He must
introduce the simple truth into a thought system which has become so
twisted and so complex that you cannot *see* that it means nothing. *He*
merely looks at its foundation and dismisses it. But *you*, who cannot
undo what you have made \[nor escape the heavy burden of its dullness
that lies upon your minds\], cannot see *through* it. It deceives you
because you chose to deceive yourselves. Those who choose to *be*
deceived will merely attack direct approaches, which would seem but to
encroach upon deception and strike at it.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Happy Learner**](#part0004.html#level-108) {#part0018_split_006.html#h1-108 .level1a}

^54^ The Holy Spirit needs a happy learner in whom His mission can be
happily accomplished. You who are steadfastly devoted to misery must
first recognize that you *are* miserable and *not* happy. The Holy
Spirit cannot teach without this contrast, for you believe that misery
*is* happiness. This has so confused you that you have undertaken to
learn to do what you can *never* do, believing that *unless* you learn
it, you will not be happy. You do not realize that the foundation on
which this most peculiar learning goal depends means *absolutely
nothing*. It *does* make sense to you.

^55^ Have faith in nothing, and you will *find* the "treasure" that you
sought. Yet you will add another burden to your mind, *already* burdened
or you would not have sought another. You will believe that nothing is
*of value* and *will* value it. A little piece of glass, a speck of
dust, a body or a war are one to you. For if you value *one* thing made
of nothing, you *have* believed that nothing can be precious and that
you can learn how to make the untrue *true*.

^56^ The Holy Spirit, *seeing* where you are but *knowing* you are
elsewhere, begins His lesson in simplicity with the fundamental teaching
that *truth is true*. This is the hardest lesson you will ever learn,
and in the end the *only* one. Simplicity is very difficult for twisted
minds. Consider all the distortions you have made of nothing---all the
strange forms and feelings and actions and reactions that you have woven
out of it. Nothing is so alien to you as the simple truth, and nothing
are you less inclined to listen to. The contrast between what is true
and what is not is *perfectly* apparent, yet you do not see it.

^57^ The simple and the obvious are not apparent to those who would make
palaces and royal robes of nothing, believing they are kings with golden
crowns because of them. All this the Holy Spirit sees and teaches simply
that all this is not true. To these unhappy learners who would teach
themselves nothing and delude themselves into believing that it is *not*
nothing, the Holy Spirit says, with steadfast quietness:

^58^ The truth is true. Nothing else matters, nothing else is real,\
and everything beside it is not there. Let Me make the one\
distinction for you which you cannot make but need to learn.\
Your faith in nothing is deceiving you. Offer your faith to Me,\
and I will place it gently in the holy place where it belongs.\
You will find no deception there but only the simple truth.\
And you will love it because you will understand it.

^59^ Like you, the Holy Spirit did not *make* truth. Like God, He
*knows* it to be true. He brings the light of truth into the darkness
and *lets* it shine on you. And as it shines, your brothers see it, and
realizing that this light is not what you have made, they see in you
more than *you* see. They will be happy learners of the lesson which
this light brings to them because it teaches them *release* from nothing
and from all the works of nothing. The heavy chains which seem to bind
them unto despair they do not see as nothing until you bring the light
to them. And *then* they see the chains have disappeared, and so they
*must* have been nothing. And *you* will see it with them. *Because* you
taught them gladness and release, they will become *your* teachers in
release and gladness.

^60^ When you teach anyone that truth is true, you learn it *with* him.
And so you learn that what seemed hardest was the easiest. Learn to be
happy learners. You will *never* learn how to make nothing everything.
Yet see that this *has* been your goal and *recognize* how foolish it
has been. Be glad it is undone, for when you look at it in simple
honesty, it *is* undone. We said before, "Be not content with nothing,"
for you *have* believed that nothing could content you. *It is not so*.

^61^ If you would be a happy learner, you must give *everything* that
you have learned over to the Holy Spirit to be *unlearned* for you. And
then begin to learn the joyous lessons that come quickly on the firm
foundation that truth is true. For what is builded there *is* true and
*built* on truth. The universe of learning will open up before you in
all its gracious simplicity. With truth before you, you will not look
back.

^62^ The happy learner meets the conditions of learning here, as he also
meets the conditions of knowledge in the Kingdom. All this lies in the
Holy Spirit's plan to free you from the past and open up the way to
freedom for you. For truth *is* true. What else could ever be or ever
was? This simple lesson holds the key to the dark door which you believe
is locked forever. You *made* this door of nothing and behind it *is*
nothing. The key is only the light which shines away the shapes and
forms and fears of nothing. Accept this key to freedom from the hands of
Christ Who gives it to you that you may join Him in the holy task of
bringing light to darkness. For, like your brothers, you do not realize
the light has come and *freed* you from the sleep of darkness.

^63^ Behold your brothers in their freedom and learn of them how to be
*free* of darkness. The light in you will waken them, and they will not
leave *you* asleep. The vision of Christ is given the very instant that
it is perceived. Where everything is clear, it is all holy. The
quietness of its simplicity is so compelling that you will realize it is
*impossible* to deny the simple truth. For there *is* nothing else. God
is everywhere, and His Son is in Him with everything. Can he sing the
dirge of sorrow when *this* is true?
:::

[]{#part0018_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Decision for Guiltlessness**](#part0004.html#level-109) {#part0018_split_007.html#h1-109 .level1a}

^64^ Learning will be commensurate with motivation, and the interference
in your motivation for learning is exactly the same as that which
interferes with *all* your thinking. The happy learner cannot *feel
guilty* about learning. This is so essential to learning that it should
never be forgotten. The guiltless learner learns so easily because his
thoughts are free. Yet this entails the recognition that guilt is
*interference, not* salvation, and serves no useful function at all.

^65^ You are accustomed to using guiltlessness merely to offset the pain
of guilt and do not look upon it as having value *in itself*. You
believe that guilt and guiltlessness are *both* of value, each
representing an escape from what the other does not offer you. You do
not want either alone, for without both, you do not see yourselves as
whole and therefore happy. Yet you are whole *only* in your
guiltlessness, and only in your guiltlessness *can* you be happy. There
*is* no conflict here. To wish for guilt in *any* way, in *any* form,
will lose appreciation of the value of your guiltlessness and push it
from your sight.

^66^ There is no compromise that you can make with guilt and escape the
pain which *only* guiltlessness allays. Learning is living here, as
creating is being in Heaven. Whenever the pain of guilt *seems* to
attract you, remember that, if you yield to it, you are deciding
*against* your happiness and will not learn *how* to be happy. Say
therefore to yourself gently, but with the conviction born of the love
of God and of His Son,

^67^ What I experience, I will make manifest.\
If I am guiltless, I have nothing to fear.\
I choose to testify to my acceptance of the Atonement,\
not for its rejection.\
I would accept my guiltlessness by making it manifest\
and sharing it.\
Let me bring peace to God's Son from his Father.

^68^ Each day, each hour and minute, even every second, you are deciding
between the crucifixion and the resurrection, between the ego and the
Holy Spirit. The ego is the choice for guilt; the Holy Spirit the
decision for guiltlessness. The power of decision is all that is yours.
What you can decide *between* is fixed because there are no alternatives
except truth and illusion. And there is no overlap between them because
they are opposites which *cannot* be reconciled and *cannot* both be
true. You are guilty *or* guiltless, bound *or* free, happy *or*
unhappy.

^69^ The miracle teaches you that you have chosen guiltlessness,
freedom, and joy. It is not a cause, but an *effect*. It is the natural
result of choosing right, attesting to your happiness that comes from
choosing to be free of guilt. Everyone you offer healing to returns it.
Everyone you attack keeps it and cherishes it by holding it against you.
Whether he does this or does it not will make no difference; you will
*think* he does. It is impossible to offer what you do not want without
this penalty. The cost of giving *is* receiving. Either it is a penalty
from which you suffer or the happy purchase of a treasure to hold dear.

^70^ No penalty is ever asked of God's Son except *by* himself and *of*
himself. Every chance given him to heal is another opportunity to
replace darkness with light and fear with love. If he refuses it, he
binds himself to darkness because he did not choose to free his brother
and enter light with him. By *giving* power to nothing, he threw away
the joyous opportunity to learn that nothing *has* no power. And by
*not* dispelling darkness, he became afraid of darkness *and* of light.
The joy of learning that darkness has no power over the Son of God is
the happy lesson the Holy Spirit teaches and would have *you* teach with
Him. It is *His* joy to teach it, as it will be *yours.*

^71^ The way to teach this simple lesson is merely this: guiltlessness
*is* invulnerability. Therefore, make your invulnerability manifest to
everyone, and teach him that *whatever* he may try to do to you, your
perfect freedom from the belief that you can be harmed shows him *he* is
guiltless. He can do *nothing* that can hurt you, and by refusing to
allow him to *think* he can, you teach him that the Atonement, which you
have accepted for *yourself,* is also *his.* There *is* nothing to
forgive. No one can hurt the Son of God. His guilt is wholly without
cause, and being without cause, *cannot* exist.

^72^ God is the *only* Cause, and guilt is not of Him. Teach no one he
has hurt you, for if you do, you teach yourself that what is not of God
*has* power over you. *The causeless cannot be*. Do not attest to it,
and do not foster belief in it in any mind. Remember always that *mind*
is one and *cause* is one. You will learn communication with this
oneness *only* when you learn to *deny* the causeless and accept the
Cause of God as *yours*. The power that God has given to His Son *is*
his, and nothing else can His Son see or choose to look upon without
imposing on himself the penalty of guilt *in place* of all the happy
teaching the Holy Spirit would gladly offer him.

^73^ Whenever you decide to make decisions for yourself, you are
thinking destructively, and the decision *will* be wrong. It will hurt
you because of the concept of decision which led to it. It is not true
that you can make decisions *by* yourself or *for* yourself alone. No
thought of God's Son *can* be separate or isolated in its effects. Every
decision is made for the *whole* Sonship, directed in and out and
influencing a constellation larger than anything you ever dreamed of.
Those who accept the Atonement *are* invulnerable. But those who believe
they are guilty *will* respond to guilt because they think it is
salvation and will not refuse to see it and side with it. \[They
*believe* that *increasing* guilt is self-*protection*.\] And they will
fail to understand the simple fact that what they do not want *must*
hurt them.

^74^ All this arises because they do not believe that what they want is
*good*. Yet will was given them *because* it is holy and will bring to
them *all* that they need, coming as naturally as peace that knows no
limits. There is nothing their wills will not provide that offers them
*anything* of value. Yet because they do not understand their will, the
Holy Spirit quietly understands it *for* them and *gives* them what they
will without effort, strain, or the impossible burden of deciding what
they want and need alone.

^75^ It will never happen that you will have to make decisions for
yourself. You are not bereft of help, and Help that *knows* the answer.
Would you be content with little, which is all that you alone can offer
yourself, when He Who gives you everything will simply *offer* it to
you? He will never ask what you have done to make you worthy of the gift
of God. Ask it not therefore of yourselves. Instead, accept His answer,
for He *knows* that you are worthy of everything God wills *for* you. Do
not try to escape the gift of God which He so freely and so gladly
offers you. He offers you but what God gave Him *for* you. You need not
decide whether or not you are deserving of it. God knows you *are.*

^76^ Would you deny the truth of God's decision and place your pitiful
appraisal of yourself in place of His calm and unswerving value of His
Son? *Nothing* can shake God's conviction of the perfect purity of
everything that He created, for it *is* wholly pure. Do not decide
against it, for being of Him, it *must* be true. Peace abides in every
mind that quietly accepts the plan which God has set for his Atonement,
relinquishing his *own*. You know not of salvation, for you do not
understand it. Make no decisions about what it is or where it lies, but
ask of the Holy Spirit everything and leave *all* decisions to His
gentle counsel.

^77^ The One Who knows the plan of God which God would have you follow
can teach you what it *is*. Only *His* wisdom is capable of guiding you
to follow it. Every decision you undertake alone but signifies that you
would define what salvation *is* and what you would be saved *from*. The
Holy Spirit knows that *all* salvation is escape from guilt. You have no
other "enemy," and against this strange distortion of the purity of the
Son of God, the Holy Spirit is your *only* friend. He is the strong
protector of your innocence, which sets you free. And it is *His*
decision to undo everything that would obscure your innocence from your
unclouded mind.

^78^ Let Him, therefore, be the *only* Guide that you would follow to
salvation. He knows the way and leads you gladly on it. *With* Him you
will not fail to learn what God wills for you *is* your will. *Without*
His guidance, you will think you know alone and will decide *against*
your peace as surely as you made the wrong decision in ever thinking
that salvation lay in you alone. Salvation is of Him to Whom God gave it
for you. He has not forgotten it. Forget Him not, and He will make every
decision for you, for your salvation, and the peace of God in you.

^79^ Seek not to appraise the worth of God's Son, whom He created holy,
for to do so is to evaluate his Father and judge *against* Him. And you
*will* feel guilty for this imagined crime, which no one in this world
or Heaven could possibly commit. God's Spirit teaches only that the
"sin" of self-replacement on the throne of God is *not* a source of
guilt. What cannot happen can have *no* effects to fear. Be quiet in
your faith in Him Who loves you and would lead you out of insanity.
Madness may be your choice, but *not* your reality. Never forget the
love of God, Who *has* remembered you. For it is quite impossible that
He could ever let His Son drop from His loving Mind wherein he was
created and where his abode was fixed in perfect peace forever.

^80^ Say to the Holy Spirit only, "Decide for me," and it is done. For
His decisions are reflections of what God *knows* about you, and in this
light, error of *any* kind becomes impossible. Why would you struggle so
frantically to anticipate all that you *cannot* know when all knowledge
lies behind every decision which the Holy Spirit makes *for* you? Learn
of His wisdom and His love and teach His answer to everyone who
struggles in the dark. For you decide for them *and* for yourself.

^81^ How gracious is it to decide all things through Him Whose equal
love is given equally to all alike! He leaves you no one *outside*
yourself, alone *without* you. And so He gives you what is yours because
your Father would have you share it with Him. In everything be led by
Him and do not reconsider. Trust Him to answer quickly, surely, and with
love for everyone who will be touched in any way by the decision. And
everyone *will* be. Would you take unto yourself the sole responsibility
for deciding what can bring *only* good to everyone? Would you *know*
this?

^82^ You taught yourselves the most unnatural habit of *not*
communicating with your Creator. Yet you remain in close communication
with Him and with everything that is within Him, as it is within
yourself. *Unlearn* isolation through His loving guidance and learn of
all the happy communication that you have thrown away but could not
lose.

^83^ Whenever you are in doubt what you should do, think of His Presence
in you and tell yourself this and *only* this:

^84^ He leadeth me and knows the way, which I know not.\
Yet He will never keep from me what He would have me learn.\
And so I trust Him to communicate to me all that\
He knows for me.

^85^ Then let Him teach you quietly how to perceive your guiltlessness,
which is *already* there.
:::

[]{#part0018_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Way of Salvation**](#part0004.html#level-110) {#part0018_split_008.html#h1-110 .level1a}

^86^ When you accept a brother's guiltlessness, you will see the
Atonement in him. For by proclaiming it in him, you make it *yours,* and
you *will* see what you sought. You will not see the symbol of your
brother's guiltlessness shining within him while you still believe it is
not there. *His* guiltlessness is *your* Atonement. Grant it to him, and
you will see the truth of what you have acknowledged. Yet truth is
offered *first* to be received, even as God gave it first to His Son.
The first in time means nothing, but the First in eternity is God the
Father, Who is both First and One. Beyond the First, there is no other,
for there is no order, no second or third and nothing *but* the First.

^87^ You who belong to the First Cause, created by Him like unto Himself
and part of Him, are more than merely guiltless. The state of
guiltlessness is only the condition in which what is not there has been
removed from the disordered mind that thought it *was*. This state, and
only this, must *you* attain with God beside you. For until you do, you
will still think that you are separate from Him. You can feel His
Presence next to you but *cannot* know that you are one with Him. This
need not be taught. Learning applies only to the condition in which it
happens *of itself*.

^88^ When you have let all that obscured the truth in your most holy
mind be undone for you and stand in grace before your Father, He will
give Himself to you as He has always done. Giving Himself is all He
knows, and so it is all knowledge. For what He knows not cannot be and
therefore cannot be given. Ask not to be forgiven, for this has already
been accomplished. Ask, rather, to learn how to *forgive* and restore
what always was to your unforgiving mind. Atonement becomes real and
visible to them that *use* it. On earth this is your only function, and
you must learn that it is all you *want* to learn.

^89^ You *will* feel guilty till you learn this. For in the end,
whatever form it takes, your guilt arises from your failure to fulfill
your function in God's Mind with all of *yours*. Can you escape this
guilt by failing to fulfill your function here? You need not understand
creation to do what must be done before that knowledge would be
meaningful to you. God breaks no barriers; neither did He *make* them.
When *you* release them, they are gone. God will not fail nor ever has
in anything.

^90^ Decide that God is right and *you* are wrong about yourself. He
created you out of Himself but still within Him. He *knows* what you
are. Remember that there is no second to Him. There cannot, therefore,
be anyone without His Holiness nor anyone unworthy of His perfect Love.
Fail not in your function of loving in a loveless place made out of
darkness and deceit, for thus are darkness and deceit undone. Fail not
*yourself,* but instead offer to God *and you* His blameless Son. For
this small gift of appreciation for His Love, God will Himself exchange
your gift for His.

^91^ Before you make *any* decisions for yourself, remember that you
have decided *against* your function in Heaven and consider carefully
whether you *want* to make decisions here. Your function here is only to
decide *against* deciding what you want in recognition that you do not
*know.* How, then, can you decide what you should do? Leave all
decisions to the One Who speaks for God and for your function as He
*knows* it. So will He teach you to remove the awful burden you have
laid upon yourself by loving not the Son of God and trying to teach him
guilt instead of love. Give up this frantic and insane attempt, which
cheats you of the joy of living with your God and Father, and awaking
gladly to His love and holiness, which join together as the truth in
you, making you one with Him.

^92^ When you have learned how to decide *with* God, all decisions
become as easy and as right as breathing. There is no effort, and you
will be led as gently as if you were being carried along a quiet path in
summer. Only your own volition seems to make deciding hard. The Holy
Spirit will not delay at all in answering your *every* question what to
do. He *knows*. And He will *tell* you and then do it *for* you. You who
are tired might consider whether this is not more restful than sleep.
For you can bring your guilt into sleeping but not into this.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Fourteen**](#part0004.html#chap-14) {#part0019_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Bringing Illusions to Truth**](#part0004.html#chap-14) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-111) {#part0019_split_000.html#h1-111 .level1a1}

^14:1^ Unless you are guiltless, you cannot know God, Whose Will is that
you know Him. Therefore, you *must* be guiltless. Yet if you do not
accept the necessary conditions for knowing Him, you have denied Him and
do not recognize Him, though He is all around you. He cannot be known
without His Son, whose guiltlessness is the condition for knowing Him.
Accepting His Son as guilty is denial of the Father so complete that
knowledge is swept away from recognition in the very mind where God
Himself has placed it. If you would but listen and learn how impossible
this is! Do not endow Him with attributes You understand. You made Him
not, and anything you understand is not of Him.

^2^ Your task is not to make reality. It is here without your making,
but not without *you*. You who have thrown your selves away and valued
God so little, hear me speak for Him and for yourselves. You cannot
understand how much your Father loves you, for there is no parallel in
your experience of the world to help you understand it. There is nothing
on earth with which it can compare and nothing you have ever felt, apart
from Him, that resembles it ever so faintly. You cannot even give a
blessing in perfect gentleness. Would you know of One Who gives forever
and Who knows of nothing *except* giving?

^3^ The Children of Heaven live in the light of the blessing of their
Father because they *know* that they are sinless. The Atonement was
established as the means of restoring guiltlessness to the mind which
has denied it and thus denied Heaven to itself. Atonement teaches you
the true condition of the Son of God. It does not teach you what you are
or what your Father is. The Holy Spirit, Who remembers this for you,
merely teaches you how to remove the blocks that stand between you and
what you know. His memory is *yours*. If you remember what *you* have
made, you are remembering nothing. Remembrance of reality is in Him and
*therefore* in you.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Guilt and Guiltlessness**](#part0004.html#level-112) {#part0019_split_001.html#h1-112 .level1a}

^4^ The guiltless and the guilty are totally incapable of understanding
one another. Each perceives the other as like himself, making them
unable to communicate because each sees the other *unlike* the way he
sees *himself.* God can communicate *only* to the Holy Spirit in your
mind because only He shares the knowledge of what you are with God. And
only the Holy Spirit can *answer* God for you, for only He knows what
God *is.* Everything else that you have placed within your mind *cannot*
exist, for what is not in communication with the Mind of God has never
been. Communication with God is life. Nothing without it *is* at all.

^5^ The only part of your mind that has reality is the part which links
you still with God. Would you have *all* of it transformed into a
radiant message of God's Love, to share with all the lonely ones who
denied Him with you? *God makes this possible*. Would you deny His
yearning to be known? You yearn for Him, as He for you. This is forever
changeless. Accept, then, the immutable. Leave the world of death
behind, and return quietly to Heaven. There is *nothing* of value here
and *everything* of value there. Listen to the Holy Spirit and to God
through Him. He speaks of you to *you*. There *is* no guilt in you, for
God is blessed in His Son as the Son is blessed in Him.

^6^ Each one of you has a special part to play in the Atonement, but the
message given to each to share is always the same---*God's Son is
guiltless.* Each one teaches the message differently and learns it
differently. Yet until he teaches it and learns it, he will suffer the
pain of dim awareness that his true function remains unfulfilled in him.
The burden of guilt is heavy, but God would not have you bound by it.
His plan for your awaking is as perfect as yours is fallible. You know
not what you do, but He Who knows is with you. His gentleness is yours,
and all the love you share with God He holds in trust for you. He would
teach you nothing except how to be happy.

^7^ Blessed Son of a wholly blessing Father, joy was created for *you.*
Who can condemn whom God has blessed? There is nothing in the Mind of
God that does not share His shining innocence. Creation is the natural
extension of perfect purity. Your only calling here is to devote
yourself with active willingness to the denial of guilt in all its
forms. To accuse is *not to understand*. The happy learners of the
Atonement become the teachers of the innocence that is the right of all
that God created. Deny them not what is their due, for you will not
withhold it from them alone.

^8^ The inheritance of the Kingdom is the right of God's Son, given him
in his creation. Do not try to steal it from him, or you will *ask* for
guilt and *will* experience it. Protect his purity from every thought
that would steal it away and keep it from his sight. Bring innocence to
light in answer to the call of the Atonement. Never allow purity to
remain hidden, but shine away the heavy veils of guilt within which the
Son of God has hidden himself from his own sight. We are all joined in
the Atonement here, and nothing else can unite us in this world. So will
the world of separation slip away and full communication be restored
between the Father and the Son.

^9^ The miracle acknowledges the guiltlessness which *must* have been
denied to produce *need* of healing. Do not withhold this glad
acknowledgment, for hope of happiness and release from suffering of
every kind lie in it. Who is there but wishes to be free of pain? He may
not yet have learned *how* to exchange his guilt for innocence nor
realize that only in this exchange can freedom from pain be his. Yet
those who have failed to learn need *teaching, not* attack. To attack
those who have need of teaching is to fail to learn from them.

^10^ Teachers of innocence, each in his own way, have joined together,
taking their part in the unified curriculum of the Atonement. There is
no unity of learning goals apart from this. There is no conflict in this
curriculum, which has *one* aim however it is taught. Each effort made
on its behalf is offered for the single purpose of *release* from guilt
to the eternal glory of God and His creation. And every teaching that
points to this points straight to Heaven and to the peace of God. There
is no pain, no trial, no fear that teaching this can fail to overcome.
The power of God Himself supports this teaching and *guarantees* its
limitless results.

^11^ Join your own efforts to the power that *cannot* fail and *must*
result in peace. No one can be untouched by teaching such as this. You
will not see yourself beyond the power of God if you teach only this.
You will not be exempt from the effects of this most holy lesson, which
seeks but to restore what is the right of God's creation. From everyone
whom you accord release from guilt, you will inevitably learn *your*
innocence. The circle of Atonement *has* no end. And you will find
ever-increasing confidence in your safe inclusion in what is for all in
everyone you bring within its safety and its perfect peace.

^12^ Peace, then, be unto everyone who becomes a teacher of peace. For
peace is the acknowledgment of perfect purity from which no one is
excluded. Within its holy circle is everyone whom God created as His
Son. Joy is its unifying attribute, with no one left outside to suffer
guilt alone. The power of God draws everyone to its safe embrace of love
and union. Stand quietly within this circle and attract all tortured
minds to join with you in the safety of its peace and holiness. Abide
with me within it as teachers of Atonement, *not* of guilt.

^13^ Blessed are you who teach with me. Our power comes not of us but of
our Father. In guiltlessness we know Him, as He knows us guiltless. I
stand within the circle, calling you to peace. Teach peace with me and
stand with me on holy ground. Remember for everyone your Father's power
that He has given him. Believe not that you cannot teach His perfect
peace. Stand not outside but join with me within. Fail not the only
purpose to which my teaching calls you. Restore to God His Son as He
created him by teaching him his innocence.

^14^ The crucifixion has no part in the Atonement. Only the resurrection
became my part in it. That is the symbol of the release from guilt by
guiltlessness. Whom you perceive as guilty, you would crucify. Yet you
*restore* guiltlessness to whomever you see as guiltless. Crucifixion is
*always* the ego's aim. It sees *as guilty,* and by its condemnation, it
would kill. The Holy Spirit sees only guiltlessness, and in His
gentleness, He would release from fear and reestablish the reign of
love. The power of love is in His gentleness, which is of God and
therefore cannot crucify nor suffer crucifixion. The temple you restore
becomes *your* altar, for it was rebuilt through you. And everything you
give to God *is* yours. Thus He creates, and thus must *you* restore.

^15^ Each one you see you place within the holy circle of Atonement or
leave outside, judging him fit for crucifixion or for redemption. If you
bring him *into* the circle of purity, you will rest there with him. If
you leave him *without*, you join him there. Judge not except in
quietness which is not of you. Refuse to accept anyone as *without* the
blessing of Atonement, and bring him *into* it by blessing him. Holiness
must be shared, for therein lies everything that makes it holy. Come
gladly to the holy circle, and look out in peace on all who think they
are outside. Cast no one out, for this is what he seeks, along with you.
Come, let us join him in the holy place of peace, which is for all of
us, united as one within the cause of peace.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Out of the Darkness**](#part0004.html#level-113) {#part0019_split_002.html#h1-113 .level1a}

^16^ The journey that we undertake together is the exchange of dark for
light, of ignorance for understanding. Nothing you understand is
fearful. It is only in darkness and in ignorance that you perceive the
frightening, and you shrink away from it to further darkness. And yet it
is only the hidden that can terrify, not for what it *is*, but for its
hiddenness. The obscure is frightening *because* you do not understand
its meaning. If you did, it would be clear, and you would be no longer
in the dark. Nothing has *hidden* value, for what is hidden cannot be
shared, and so its value is unknown. The hidden is *kept apart*, but
value always lies in joint appreciation. What is concealed cannot be
loved, and so it *must* be feared.

^17^ The quiet light in which the Holy Spirit dwells within you is
merely perfect openness in which nothing is hidden and therefore nothing
is fearful. Attack will *always* yield to love if it is *brought* to
love, not hidden *from* it. There is no darkness that the light of love
will not dispel, unless it is concealed from love's beneficence. What is
kept *apart* from love cannot share its healing power, because it has
been separated off and kept in darkness. The sentinels of darkness watch
over it carefully, and you who made these guardians of illusion out of
nothing are now afraid of them.

^18^ Would you *continue* to give imagined power to these strange ideas
of safety? They are neither safe nor unsafe. They do not protect;
neither do they attack. They do nothing at all, *being* nothing at all.
As guardians of darkness and of ignorance, look to them only for fear,
for what they keep obscure *is* fearful. But let them go, and what was
fearful will be so no longer. Without protection of obscurity, *only*
the light of love remains, for only this *has* meaning and *can* live in
light. Everything else *must* disappear.

^19^ Death yields to life simply because destruction is not *true.* The
light of guiltlessness shines guilt away because, when they are brought
*together*, the truth of one *must* make the falsity of its opposite
perfectly clear. Keep not guilt and guiltlessness apart, for your belief
that you can have them *both* is meaningless. All you have done by
keeping them apart is lose their meaning by confusing them with each
other. And so you do not realize that only one means anything, and the
other is wholly without sense of *any* kind.

^20^ You have interpreted the separation as a means which you have made
for breaking your communication with your Father. The Holy Spirit
reinterprets it as a means of reestablishing what has not been broken
but *has* been made obscure. All things you made have use to Him for His
most holy purpose. He *knows* you are not separate from God, but He
perceives much in your mind that lets you *think* you are. All this, and
nothing else, would He separate from you. The power of decision, which
you made *in place* of the power of creation, He would teach you how to
use on your *behalf.* You who made it to crucify yourselves must learn
of Him how to apply it to the holy cause of restoration.

^21^ You who speak in dark and devious symbols do not understand the
language you have made. It *has* no meaning, for its purpose is not
communication, but rather the *disruption* of communication. If the
purpose of language *is* communication, how can this tongue mean
anything? Yet even this strange and twisted effort to communicate
through *not* communicating holds enough of love to *make* it meaningful
if its interpreter is *not* its maker. You who made it are but
expressing conflict, from which the Holy Spirit would release you. Leave
what you would communicate to Him. He will interpret it to you with
perfect clarity, for He knows with Whom you *are* in perfect
communication.

^22^ You know not what you say, and so you know not what is said to you.
Yet your Interpreter perceives the meaning in your alien language. He
will not attempt to communicate the meaningless. But He *will* separate
out all that has meaning, dropping off the rest and offering your true
communication to those who would communicate as truly with you. You
speak two languages at once, and this *must* lead to unintelligibility.
Yet if one means nothing and the other everything, only that one is
possible for purposes of communication. The other but *interferes* with
it.

^23^ The Holy Spirit's function is *entirely* communication. He
therefore must remove whatever interferes with it in order to *restore*
it. Therefore, keep no source of interference from His sight, for He
will not attack your sentinels. But bring them to Him, and let His
gentleness teach you that in the light they are not fearful and *cannot*
serve to guard the dark doors behind which nothing at all is carefully
concealed. We must open all doors and let the light come streaming
through. There are no hidden chambers in God's temple. Its gates are
open wide to greet His Son. No one can fail to come where God has called
him if he close not the door himself upon his Father's welcome.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Perception without Deceit**](#part0004.html#level-114) {#part0019_split_003.html#h1-114 .level1a}

^24^ What do you *want*? Light or darkness, knowledge or ignorance are
yours, but not both. Opposites must be brought together and not kept
apart. For their separation is only in your mind, and they are
reconciled by union, as *you* are. In union, everything that is not real
*must* disappear, for truth *is* union. As darkness disappears in light,
so ignorance fades away when knowledge dawns. Perception is the medium
by which ignorance is brought to knowledge. Yet the perception must be
without deceit, for otherwise it becomes the messenger of ignorance
rather than a helper in the search for truth.

^25^ The search for truth is but the honest searching out of everything
that interferes with truth. Truth *is*. It can be neither lost nor
sought nor found. It is there, wherever *you* are, being *within* you.
Yet it *can* be recognized or unrecognized, real or false to *you*. If
you hide it, it becomes unreal to you *because* you hid it and
surrounded it with fear. Under each cornerstone of fear on which you
have erected your insane system of belief, the truth lies hidden. Yet
you cannot know this, for by hiding truth in fear, you see no reason to
believe the *more* you look at fear, the *less* you see it, and the
clearer what it *conceals* becomes.

^26^ It is not possible to convince the unknowing that they know. From
their point of view, it is not true. Yet it *is* true because *God*
knows it. These are clearly opposite viewpoints of what the "unknowing"
are. To God, unknowing is impossible. It is therefore not a point of
view at all but merely a belief in something that does not exist. It is
only this belief that the unknowing have, and by it they are wrong about
themselves. They have *defined* themselves as they were not created.
Their creation was not a point of view, but rather a certainty.
Uncertainty brought to certainty does not retain *any* conviction of
reality.

^27^ You must have noticed that the emphasis has been on bringing what
is undesirable *to* the desirable; what you do *not* want to what you
*do*. You will realize that salvation must come to you this way if you
consider what dissociation is. Dissociation is a distorted process of
thinking whereby two systems of belief which cannot coexist are both
*maintained*. It has *been* recognized that if they were brought
*together* their joint acceptance would become impossible. But if one is
kept in darkness from the other, their *separation* seems to keep them
both alive and equal in their reality. Their joining thus becomes the
source of fear, for if they meet, acceptance *must* be withdrawn from
one of them.

^28^ You *cannot* have them both, for each denies the other. Apart, this
fact is lost from sight, for each in a *separate* place can be endowed
with firm belief. Bring them *together,* and the fact of their complete
incompatibility is instantly apparent. One will go *because* the other
is seen in the same place. Light cannot enter darkness when a mind
believes in darkness and will not *let* it go. Truth does not struggle
against ignorance, and love does not attack fear. What needs no
protection does not defend itself. Defense is of *your* making. God
knows it not. The Holy Spirit uses defenses on *behalf* of truth only
because you made them *against* it. His perception of them, according to
His purpose, merely changes them into a call *for* what you have
*attacked* with them.

^29^ Defenses, like everything you made, must be gently turned to your
own good, translated by the Holy Spirit from means of self-destruction
to means of preservation and release. His task is mighty, but the power
of God is with Him. Therefore, to Him it is so easy that it was
accomplished the instant it was given Him for you. Do not delay
yourselves in your return to peace by wondering how He can fulfill what
God has given Him to do. Leave that to Him Who knows. You are not asked
to do mighty tasks yourself. You are merely asked to do the little He
suggests you do, trusting Him only to the small extent of believing that
if He asks it, you *can* do it. You will *see* how easily all that He
asks can be accomplished.

^30^ The Holy Spirit asks of you but this---bring to Him every secret
you have locked away from Him. Open every door to Him and bid Him enter
the darkness and lighten it away. At your request He enters gladly. He
brings the light to darkness if you make the darkness *open* to Him. But
what you hide He cannot look upon. For He sees for *you*, and unless you
look *with* Him, He cannot see. The vision of Christ is not for Him
alone but for Him with *you*. Bring, therefore, all your dark and secret
thoughts to Him and look upon them *with* Him. He holds the light, and
you the darkness. They *cannot* coexist when both of you together look
on them. His judgment *must* prevail, and He will *give* it to you as
you join your perception to His. Joining with Him in seeing is the way
in which you learn to share with Him the interpretation of perception
that leads to knowledge.

^31^ You cannot see alone. Sharing perception with Him Whom God has
given you teaches you how to *recognize* what you see. It is the
recognition that nothing you see means *anything* alone. Seeing with Him
will show you that all meaning, including *yours,* comes not from double
vision but from the gentle fusing of everything into *one* meaning,
*one* emotion, and *one* purpose. God has one purpose which He shares
with you. The single vision which the Holy Spirit offers you will bring
this oneness to your mind with clarity and brightness so intense you
could not wish for all the world not to accept what God would have you
have. Behold your will, accepting it as His, with all His love as yours.
All honor to you through Him, and through Him unto God.

^32^ In the darkness you have obscured the glory God gave you and the
power He bestowed upon His guiltless Son. All this lies hidden in every
darkened place shrouded in guilt and in the dark denial of innocence.
Behind the dark doors which you have closed lies nothing, because
nothing *can* obscure the gift of God. It is the closing of the doors
that interferes with recognition of the power of God that shines in you.
Banish not power from your mind, but let all that would hide your glory
be brought to the judgment of the Holy Spirit and there undone. Whom He
would save for glory *is* saved for it. He has promised the Father that
through Him you would be released from littleness to glory. To what He
promised God He is wholly faithful, for He shared with God the promise
that was given Him to share with *you.*

^33^ He shares it still, for *you*. Everything that promises otherwise,
great or small, however much or little valued, He will replace with the
*one* promise given unto Him to lay upon the altar to your Father and
His Son. No altar stands to God *without* His Son. And nothing brought
there that is not equally worthy of both but will be replaced by gifts
wholly acceptable to Father *and* to Son. Can you offer guilt to God?
You cannot, then, offer it to His Son. For they are not apart, and gifts
to one *are* offered to the other.

^34^ You know not God because you know not this. And yet you *do* know
God and *also* this. All this is safe within you, where the Holy Spirit
shines. He shines not in division, but in the meeting place where God,
united with His Son, speaks to His Son through Him. Communication
between what cannot be divided *cannot* cease. The holy meeting place of
the unseparated Father and His Son lies in the Holy Spirit and in *you*.
All interference in the communication that God Himself wills with His
Son is quite impossible here. Unbroken and uninterrupted love flows
constantly between the Father and the Son, as *both* would have it be.
And so it *is*.

^35^ Let your minds wander not through darkened corridors, away from
light's center. You may choose to lead yourselves astray, but you can
only be brought *together* by the Guide appointed for you. He will
surely lead you to where God and His Son await your recognition. They
are joined in giving you the gift of oneness, before which *all*
separation vanishes. Unite with what you *are.* You *cannot* join with
anything except reality. God's glory and His Son's belong to you in
truth. They *have* no opposite, and nothing else *can* you bestow upon
yourselves.

^36^ There is no substitute for truth. And truth will make this plain to
you as you are brought into the place where you must *meet* with truth.
And there you must be led, through gentle understanding which can lead
you nowhere else. Where God is, there are *you*. Such *is* the truth.
Nothing can change the knowledge given you by God into unknowingness.
Everything God created knows its Creator. For this is how creation is
accomplished by the Creator and by His creations. In the holy meeting
place are joined the Father and His creations, and the creations of His
Son with them together. There is one link which joins them all together,
holding them in the oneness out of which creation happens.

^37^ The link with which the Father joins Himself to those He gives the
power to create like Him can *never* be dissolved. Heaven itself is
union with all of creation and with its One Creator. And Heaven remains
the Will of God for you. Lay no gifts other than this upon your altars,
for nothing can coexist beside it. Here your meager offerings are
brought together with the gift of God, and only what is worthy of the
Father will be accepted by the Son, for whom it was intended. To whom
God gives Himself, He *is* given. Your little gifts will vanish on the
altar where He has placed His Own.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Recognition of Holiness**](#part0004.html#level-115) {#part0019_split_004.html#h1-115 .level1a}

^38^ The Atonement does not *make* holy. You were *created* holy. It
merely brings unholiness *to* holiness, or what you *made* to what you
*are*. The bringing together of truth and illusion, of the ego to God,
is the Holy Spirit's only function. Keep not your making from your
Father, for hiding it has cost you knowledge of Him and of yourselves.
The knowledge is safe, but wherein is *your* safety apart from it? The
making of time to *take the place* of timelessness lay in the decision
to be not as you were. Thus, truth was made past, and the present was
dedicated to illusion. And the past, too, was changed and interposed
between what always was and *now*. The past which *you* remember *never*
was and represents only the denial of what *always* was.

^39^ Bringing the ego to God is but to bring error to truth, where it
stands corrected because it is the *opposite* of what it meets and is
undone, because the contradiction can no longer stand. How long can
contradiction stand when its impossible nature is clearly revealed? What
disappears in light is not attacked. It merely vanishes because it is
not true. Different realities are meaningless, for reality must be one.
It *cannot* change with time or mood or chance. Its changelessness is
what *makes* it real. This cannot *be* undone. Undoing is for unreality.
And this reality *will* do for you.

^40^ Merely by being what it is does truth release you from everything
that it is *not*. The Atonement is so gentle you need but whisper to it,
and all its power will rush to your assistance and support. You are not
frail with God beside you. Yet without Him you are nothing. The
Atonement offers you God. The gift which you refused is held by Him in
you. His Spirit holds it there for you. God has not left His altar,
though His worshiper placed other gods upon it. The temple still is
holy, for the Presence that dwells within it *is* Holiness.

^41^ In the temple Holiness waits quietly for the return of them that
love it. The Presence knows they will return to purity and to grace. The
graciousness of God will take them gently in and cover all their sense
of pain and loss with the immortal assurance of their Father's Love.
There, fear of death will be replaced with joy of living. For God is
Life, and they *abide* in Life. \[Life is as holy as the Holiness by
which it was created.\] The Presence of Holiness lives in everything
that lives, for Holiness *created* life and leaves not what It created
holy as Itself.

^42^ In this world you can become a spotless mirror in which the
Holiness of your Creator shines forth from you to all around you. You
can reflect Heaven *here*. Yet no reflections of the images of other
gods must dim the mirror that would hold God's reflection in it. Earth
can reflect Heaven or hell; God or the ego. You need but leave the
mirror clean and clear of all the images of hidden darkness you have
drawn upon it. God will shine upon it of Himself. Only the clear
reflection of Himself can *be* perceived upon it. Reflections are seen
in light. In darkness they are obscure, and their meaning seems to lie
only in shifting interpretations rather than in themselves.

^43^ The reflection of God *needs* no interpretation. It is *clear.*
Clean but the mirror, and the message which shines forth from what the
mirror holds out for everyone to see no one can *fail* to understand. It
is the message that the Holy Spirit is holding to the mirror that is in
him. He recognizes it because he has been taught his *need* for it but
knows not where to look to find it. Let him, then, see it in *you* and
*share* it with you.

^44^ Could you but realize for a single instant the power of healing
that the reflection of God, shining in you, can bring to all the world,
you could not wait to make the mirror of your mind clean to receive the
image of the holiness that heals the world. The image of holiness which
shines in your mind is not obscure and will not change. Its meaning to
those who look upon it is not obscure, for everyone perceives it as the
*same*. All bring their different problems to its healing light, but all
their problems are met *only* with healing there.

^45^ The response of holiness to *any* form of error is always the same.
There is no contradiction in what holiness calls forth. Its *one*
response is healing, without regard for what is brought to it. Those who
have learned to offer only healing because of the reflection of holiness
in them are ready at last for Heaven. There, holiness is not a
reflection but rather the actual condition of what was but reflected to
them here. God is no image, and His creations, as part of Him, hold Him
in them in truth. They do not merely *reflect* truth, for they *are*
truth.
:::

[]{#part0019_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Shift to Miracles**](#part0004.html#level-116) {#part0019_split_005.html#h1-116 .level1a}

^46^ When no perception stands between God and His creations, or between
His Children and their own, the knowledge of creation must continue
forever. The reflections which you accept into the mirror of your minds
in time but bring eternity nearer or farther. But eternity itself is
beyond *all* time. Reach out of time and touch it, with the help of its
reflection in you. And you will turn from time to holiness as surely as
the reflection of holiness calls everyone to lay all guilt aside.
Reflect the peace of Heaven *here* and bring this world to Heaven. For
the reflection of truth draws everyone *to* truth, and as they enter
into it, they leave all reflections behind.

^47^ In Heaven reality is shared and not reflected. By sharing its
reflection here, its truth becomes the only perception the Son of God
accepts. And thus, remembrance of his Father dawns on him, and he can no
longer be satisfied with anything but his own reality. You on earth have
no conception of limitlessness, for the world you seem to live in *is* a
world of limits. In this world, it is not true that anything without
order of difficulty can occur. The miracle, therefore, has a unique
function and is motivated by a unique Teacher, Who brings the laws of
another world to this one. The miracle is the *one* thing you can do
that transcends order, being based not on differences but on equality.

^48^ Miracles are not in competition, and the number of them that you
can do is limitless. They can be simultaneous and legion. This is not
difficult to understand, once you conceive of them as possible at all.
What *is* more difficult to grasp is the lack of order of difficulty
which stamps the miracle as something that must come from elsewhere, not
from here. From the world's viewpoint, this is impossible. You have
experienced lack of competition among your thoughts, which, even though
they may conflict, can occur to you together and in great numbers. You
are so used to this that it can cause you little surprise.

^49^ Yet you are also used to classifying some of your thoughts as more
important, larger or better, wiser or more productive and valuable than
others. And this is true about the thoughts which cross the mind of
those who think they live apart. For some are reflections of Heaven,
while others are motivated by the ego, which but *seems* to think. The
result is a weaving, changing pattern which never rests and is never
still. It shifts unceasingly across the mirror of your mind, and the
reflections of Heaven last but a moment and grow dim as darkness blots
them out. Where there was light, darkness removes it in an instant, and
alternating patterns of light and darkness sweep constantly across your
minds.

^50^ The little sanity which still remains is held together by a sense
of order which *you* establish. Yet the very fact that you can *do* this
and bring *any* order into chaos shows you that you are not an ego and
that more than an ego *must* be in you. For the ego *is* chaos, and if
it were all of you, no order at all would be possible. Yet though the
order which you impose upon your minds limits the ego, it *also* limits
*you*. To order is to judge and to arrange *by* judgment. \[Therefore,
it is not your function, but the Holy Spirit's.\] It will seem difficult
for you to learn that you have no basis *at all* for ordering your
thoughts. This lesson the Holy Spirit teaches by giving you shining
examples to show you that your way of ordering is wrong, but that a
better way is offered you.

^51^ The miracle offers exactly the same response to every call for
help. It does not judge the call. It merely recognizes what it *is* and
answers accordingly. It does not consider which call is louder or
greater or more important. You may wonder how you who are still bound to
judgment can be asked to do that which requires no judgment of your own.
The answer is very simple. The power of God, and *not* of you, engenders
miracles. The miracle itself is but the witness that you have the power
of God in you. That is the reason why the miracle gives equal blessing
to all who share in it, and that is also why *everyone* shares in it.
The power of God is limitless. And being always maximal, it offers
*everything* to *every* call from *anyone*. There *is* no order of
difficulty here. A call for help is given help.

^52^ The only judgment involved at all is the Holy Spirit's *one*
division into two categories---one of love and the other the call for
love. *You* cannot safely make this division, for you are much too
confused either to recognize love or to believe that everything else is
nothing but a need for love. You are too bound to form and not to
content. What you consider content is not content at all. It is merely
form, and nothing else. For you do not respond to what a brother
*really* offers you, but only to the particular perception of his
offering by which the ego judges it.

^53^ The ego is incapable of understanding content and is totally
unconcerned with it. To the ego, if the form is acceptable, the content
*must* be. Otherwise, it will attack the form. You who believe you
understand something of the dynamics of the mind, let me assure you that
you know nothing of it at all. For of yourselves you *could* not know of
it. The study of the ego is *not* the study of the mind. In fact, the
ego enjoys the study of itself and thoroughly approves the undertakings
of students who would analyze it, approving its importance. Yet they but
study form with meaningless content. For their teacher is senseless,
though careful to conceal this fact behind a lot of words which sound
impressive but which lack any consistent sense when they are put
*together*.

^54^ This is characteristic of the ego's judgments. Separately, they
seem to hold, but put them together and the system of thought which
arises from joining them is incoherent and utterly chaotic. For form is
not enough for meaning, and the underlying lack of content makes a
cohesive system impossible. Separation therefore remains the ego's
chosen condition. For no one alone can judge the ego truly. Yet when two
or more *join together* in searching for truth, the ego can no longer
defend its lack of content. The fact of union *tells* them it is not
true.

^55^ It is impossible to remember God in secret and alone. For
remembering Him means you are *not* alone and willing to remember it.
Take no thought for yourself, for no thought you hold *is* for yourself.
If you would remember your Father, let the Holy Spirit order your
thoughts and give only the answer with which He answers you. Everyone
seeks for love as you do and knows it not unless he joins with you in
seeking it. If you undertake the search together, you bring with you a
light so powerful that what you see is *given* meaning. The lonely
journey fails because it has excluded what it would *find*.

^56^ As God communicates to the Holy Spirit in you, so does the Holy
Spirit translate His communications *through* you so *you* can
understand them. God has no secret communications, for everything of Him
is perfectly open and freely accessible to all, being *for* all. Nothing
lives in secret, and what you would hide from the Holy Spirit is
nothing. Every interpretation *you* would lay upon a brother is
senseless. Let the Holy Spirit *show* him to you and teach you both his
love and need for love. Neither his mind *nor yours* holds more than
these two orders of thought.

^57^ The miracle is the recognition that this is true. Where there is
love, your brother must give it to you because of what it *is*. But
where there is *need* for love, *you* must give it because of what *you*
are. Long ago we said this course will teach you what you are, restoring
to you your identity. We have already learned that this identity is
shared. The miracle becomes the *means* of sharing it. By supplying your
identity wherever it is *not* recognized, *you* will recognize it. And
God Himself, Who wills to be with His Son forever, will bless each
recognition of His Son with all the love He holds for him. Nor will the
power of *all* His love be absent from any miracle you offer to His Son.
How, then, can there be any order of difficulty among them?
:::

[]{#part0019_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Test of Truth**](#part0004.html#level-117) {#part0019_split_006.html#h1-117 .level1a}

^58^ Yet the essential thing is learning that *you do not know*.
Knowledge is power, and all power is of God. You who have tried to keep
power for yourselves have lost it. You still have the power, but you
have interposed so much between it and your *awareness* of it that you
cannot use it. Everything you have taught yourselves has made your power
more and more obscure to you. You know not *what* it is nor *where*. You
have made a semblance of power and a show of strength so pitiful that it
*must* fail you. For power is not a seeming strength, and truth is
beyond semblance of any kind. Yet all that stands between you and the
power of God in you is but your learning of the false and your attempts
to undo the true.

^59^ Be willing, then, for all of it to be undone, and be glad that you
are not bound to it forever. For you have taught yourselves how to
imprison the Son of God, a lesson so unthinkable that only the insane,
in deepest sleep, could even dream of it. Can God learn how *not* to be
God? And can His Son, given all power by Him, learn to be powerless?
What have you taught yourselves that you can possibly prefer to keep in
place of what you *have* and what you *are*?

^60^ Atonement teaches you how to escape forever from everything that
you have taught yourselves in the past by showing you only what you are
*now*. Learning *has been* accomplished before its effects are manifest.
Learning is therefore in the past, but its influence determines the
present by giving it whatever meaning it holds for you. *Your* learning
gives the present no meaning at all. Nothing you have ever learned can
help you understand the present or teach you how to undo the past. Your
past *is* what you have taught yourselves. *Let it all go*. Do not
attempt to understand any event or anything or anyone in its light, for
the light of darkness by which you try to see can *only* obscure.

^61^ Put no confidence at all in darkness to illuminate your
understanding, for if you do, you contradict the light and thereby
*think* you see the darkness. Yet darkness cannot *be* seen, for it is
nothing more than a condition in which seeing becomes impossible. You
who have not yet brought all of the darkness you have taught yourselves
unto the light in you can hardly judge the truth and value of this
course. Yet God did not abandon you. And so you have another lesson sent
from Him, *already* learned for every Child of light by Him to Whom God
gave it. This lesson shines with God's glory, for in it lies His power,
which He shares so gladly with His Son.

^62^ Learn of His happiness, which is *yours*. But to accomplish this,
all your dark lessons must be brought willingly to truth and joyously
laid down by hands open to receive, not closed to take. Every dark
lesson that you bring to Him Who teaches light He will accept from you
because you do not want it. And He will gladly *exchange* each one for
the bright lesson He has learned for you. Never believe that any lesson
you have learned *apart* from Him means anything.

^63^ You have one test, as sure as God, by which to recognize if what
you learned is true. If you are wholly free of fear of any kind, and if
all those who meet or even think of you share in your perfect peace,
then you can be sure that you have learned God's lesson and not yours.
Unless all this is true, there *are* dark lessons in your minds which
hurt and hinder you and everyone around you. The *absence* of perfect
peace means but *one* thing: you *think* you do not will for God's Son
what His Father wills for him. Every dark lesson teaches this in one
form or another. And each bright lesson, with which the Holy Spirit will
replace the dark ones you do not accept and hide, teaches you that you
will *with* the Father unto His Son.

^64^ Do not be concerned how you can learn a lesson so completely
different from everything you have taught yourselves. How would you
know? Your part is very simple. You need only recognize that everything
you learned you do not *want*. Ask to be *taught* and do not use your
experiences to confirm what *you* have learned. When your peace is
threatened or disturbed in any way, say to yourself,

^65^ I do not know what anything, including this, means.\
And so I do not know how to respond to it.\
And I will not use my own past learning as the light to guide me now.

^66^ By this refusal to attempt to teach yourself what you do not know,
the Guide Whom God has given you will speak to you. He will take His
rightful place in your awareness the instant *you* abandon it and offer
it to Him.

^67^ *You* cannot be your guide to miracles, for it is you who made them
necessary. And *because* you did, the means on which you can depend for
miracles has been provided *for* you. God's Son can make no needs His
Father will not meet if he but turn to Him ever so little. Yet He cannot
compel His Son to turn to Him and remain Himself. It is impossible that
God lose His Identity, for if He did, you would lose *yours*. And being
yours, He cannot change Himself, for your identity *is* changeless. The
miracle acknowledges His changelessness by seeing His Son as he always
was and not as he would make himself. The miracle brings the effects
which *only* guiltlessness can bring and thus establishes the fact that
guiltlessness must *be*.

^68^ How can you, so firmly bound to guilt and committed so to remain,
establish for yourself your guiltlessness? That is impossible. But be
sure that you are willing to acknowledge that it *is* impossible. It is
only because you think that you can run some little part or deal with
certain aspects of your lives alone that the guidance of the Holy Spirit
is limited. Thus would you make *Him* undependable and use this fancied
undependability as an excuse for keeping certain dark lessons from Him.
And by so limiting the guidance that you would *accept*, you are unable
to depend on miracles to answer all your problems for you.

^69^ Do you think that what the Holy Spirit would have you *give* He
would *withhold* from you? You have *no* problems which He cannot solve
by offering you a miracle. Miracles are for *you*. And every fear or
pain or trial you have *has been* undone. He has brought all of them to
light, having accepted them *instead* of you and recognized they never
were. There are no dark lessons He has not *already* lightened for you.
The lessons you would teach yourselves He has corrected already. They do
not exist in His Mind at all. For the past binds Him not and therefore
binds not you. He does not see time as you do. And each miracle He
offers you corrects your use of time and makes it His.

^70^ He Who has freed you from the past would teach you *are* free of
it. He would but have you accept His accomplishments as *yours* because
he did them *for* you. And because he did, they *are* yours. He has made
you free of what you made. You can deny Him, but you *cannot* call on
Him in vain. He *always* gives what He has made *in place* of you. He
would establish His bright teaching so firmly in your mind that no dark
lessons of guilt can abide in what He has established as holy by His
Presence. Thank God that He is there and works through you. And all His
works are yours. He offers you a miracle with every one you let Him do
through you.

^71^ God's Son will *always* be indivisible. As we are held as one in
God, so do we learn as one in Him. God's Teacher is as like to His
Creator as is His Son, and through His Teacher does God proclaim His
Oneness *and* His Son's. Listen in silence, and do not raise your voice
against Him. For He teaches the miracle of oneness, and before His
lesson division disappears. Teach like Him here, and you will remember
that you have *always* created like your Father. The miracle of creation
has never ceased, having the holy stamp of immortality upon it. This is
the Will of God for all creation, and all creation joins in willing
this.

^72^ Those who remember always that they know nothing, but who have
become willing to learn *everything*, will learn it. But whenever they
trust themselves, they will *not* learn. They have destroyed their
motivation for learning by thinking they *already* know. Think not you
understand anything until you pass the test of perfect peace, for peace
and understanding go together and never can be found alone. Each brings
the other *with* it, for it is the law of God they be not separate. They
are cause and effect, each to the other, so where one is absent the
other *cannot* be.

^73^ Only those who see they cannot know *unless* the effects of
understanding are with them can really learn at all. And for this, it
must be peace they *want* and nothing else. Whenever you think *you*
know, peace will depart from you because you have abandoned the Teacher
of Peace. Whenever you fully realize that you know *not*, peace will
return, for you will have invited Him to do so by abandoning the ego on
behalf of Him. Call not upon the ego for anything. It is only *this*
that you need do. The Holy Spirit will, of *Himself*, fill every mind
that so makes room for Him.

^74^ If you want peace, you must abandon the teacher of attack. The
Teacher of peace will *never* abandon you. You can desert Him, but He
will never reciprocate, for His faith in you *is* His understanding. It
is as firm as is His faith in His Creator, and He knows that faith in
His Creator *must* encompass faith in His creation. In this consistency
lies His holiness, which He cannot abandon, for it is not His Will to do
so. With your perfection ever in His sight, He gives the gift of peace
to everyone who perceives the need for peace and who would have it. Make
way for peace, and it will come. For understanding is in you, and from
it peace *must* come.

^75^ The power of God, from which they both arise, is yours as surely as
it is His. You think you know Him not only because, alone, it is
impossible to know Him. Yet see the mighty works that He will do through
you, and you must be convinced you did them through Him. It is
impossible to deny the Source of effects so powerful they *could* not be
of you. Leave room for Him, and you will find yourself so filled with
power that *nothing* will prevail against your peace. And this will be
the test by which you recognize that you have understood.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Fifteen**](#part0004.html#chap-15) {#part0020_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Purpose of Time**](#part0004.html#chap-15) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-118) {#part0020_split_000.html#h1-118 .level1a1}

^15:1^ Can you imagine what it means to have no cares, no worries, no
anxieties, but merely to be perfectly calm and quiet all the time? Yet
that is what time is *for*---to learn just that and nothing more. God's
Teacher cannot be satisfied with His teaching until it constitutes *all*
your learning. He has not fulfilled His teaching function until you have
become such a consistent learner that you learn *only* of Him. When this
has happened, you will no longer need a teacher or time in which to
learn.

^2^ One source of perceived discouragement from which you suffer is your
belief that this takes time, and that the results of the Holy Spirit's
teaching are far in the future. This is not so. For the Holy Spirit
*uses* time in His own way and is not bound by it. \[Time is His friend
in teaching. It does not waste Him as it does you.\] And all the waste
that time seems to bring with it is due but to your identification with
the ego, which uses time to support its belief in destruction. The ego,
like the Holy Spirit, uses time to convince you of the inevitability of
the goal and end of teaching. To the ego the goal is death, which *is*
its end. But to the Holy Spirit the goal is life, which *has* no end.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Uses of Time**](#part0004.html#level-119) {#part0020_split_001.html#h1-119 .level1a}

^3^ The ego is an ally of time, but not a friend. For it is as
mistrustful of death as it is of life, and what it wants for you it
cannot tolerate. The ego wants *you* dead, but *not* itself. The outcome
of its strange religion must therefore be the conviction that it can
pursue you beyond the grave. And out of its unwillingness for you to
find peace even in the death it wants for you, it offers you immortality
in hell. It speaks to you of Heaven but assures you that Heaven is not
for you. How can the guilty hope for Heaven? The belief in hell is
inescapable to those who identify with the ego. Their nightmares and
their fears are all associated with it.

^4^ The ego teaches that hell is in the *future*, for this is what all
its teaching is directed to. Hell is its *goal*, for although the ego
aims at death and dissolution as an end, it does not *believe* it. The
goal of death, which it craves for you, leaves it unsatisfied. No one
who follows the ego's teaching is without the fear of death. Yet if
death were thought of merely as an end to pain, would it be *feared*? We
have seen this strange paradox in the ego's thought system before, but
never so clearly as here. For the ego must seem to *keep* fear from you
to keep your allegiance. Yet it must *engender* fear in order to
maintain *itself*.

^5^ Again the ego tries and all too frequently succeeds in doing both by
using dissociation for holding its contradictory aims together so that
they *seem* to be reconciled. The ego teaches thus: Death is the end as
far as hope of Heaven goes. Yet because you and itself cannot be
separated, and because it cannot conceive of its *own* death, it will
pursue you still because guilt is eternal. Such is the ego's version of
immortality. And it is this the ego's version of time supports.

^6^ The ego teaches that Heaven is here and now because the *future* is
hell. Even when it attacks so savagely that it tries to take the life of
someone who hears it temporarily as the *only* voice, it speaks of hell
even to him. For it tells him hell is *here* and bids him leap from hell
into oblivion. The only time the ego allows anyone to look upon with
some amount of equanimity is the past. And even there its only value is
that it is no more.

^7^ How bleak and despairing is the ego's use of time! And how
terrifying! For underneath its fanatical insistence that the past and
future be the same is hidden a far more insidious threat to peace. The
ego does not advertise its final threat, for it would have its
worshipers still believe that it can offer the *escape* from it. But the
belief in guilt *must* lead to the belief in hell, *and always does*.
The only way in which the ego allows the fear of hell to be experienced
is to bring hell *here,* but always as a foretaste of the future. For no
one who considers himself as deserving hell can believe that punishment
will end in peace.

^8^ The Holy Spirit teaches thus: There *is* no hell. Hell is only what
the ego has made of the *present.* The belief in hell is what prevents
you from *understanding* the present, because you are *afraid* of it.
The Holy Spirit leads as steadily to Heaven as the ego drives to hell.
For the Holy Spirit, Who knows *only* the present, uses it to undo the
fear by which the ego would make the present useless. There is *no*
escape from fear in the ego's use of time. For time, according to its
teaching, is nothing but a teaching device for *compounding* guilt until
it becomes all-encompassing and demands vengeance forever.

^9^ The Holy Spirit would undo all of this *now*. Fear is *not* of the
present but only of the past and future, which do not exist. There is no
fear in the present when each instant stands clear and separated from
the past, without its shadow reaching out into the future. Each instant
is a clean, untarnished birth, in which the Son of God emerges from the
past into the present. And the present extends forever. It is so
beautiful and so clean and free of guilt that nothing but happiness is
there. No darkness is remembered, and immortality and joy are *now*.

^10^ This lesson takes *no* time. For what is time without a past and
future? It *has* taken time to misguide you so completely, but it takes
no time at all to be what you *are.* Begin to practice the Holy Spirit's
use of time as a teaching aid to happiness and peace. Take this very
instant, *now*, and think of it as *all there is* of time. Nothing can
reach you here out of the past, and it is here that you are *completely*
absolved, *completely* free, and *wholly* without condemnation. From
this holy instant wherein holiness was born again, you will go forth in
time without fear and with no sense of change *with* time.

^11^ Time is inconceivable without change, yet holiness does not change.
Learn from this instant more than merely hell does not exist. In this
redeeming instant lies Heaven. And Heaven will not change, for the birth
into the holy present is *salvation* from change. Change is an illusion,
taught by those who could not see themselves as guiltless. There is no
change in Heaven because there is no change in God. In the holy instant
in which you see yourself as bright with freedom, you *will* remember
God. For remembering Him *is* to remember freedom.

^12^ Whenever you are tempted to be dispirited by the thought of how
long it would take to change your mind so completely, ask yourself, "How
long is an instant?" Could you not give so short a time to the Holy
Spirit for your salvation? He asks no more, for He has no need of more.
It takes far longer to teach you how to be willing to give Him this than
for Him to use this tiny instant to offer you the whole of Heaven. In
exchange for this instant, He stands ready to give you the remembrance
of eternity.

^13^ You will never give this holy instant to the Holy Spirit on behalf
of your release while you are unwilling to give it to your brothers on
behalf of *theirs.* For the instant of holiness is shared, and cannot be
yours alone. Remember, then, when you are tempted to attack a brother,
that his instant of release is *yours*. Miracles are the instants of
release you offer and will *receive*. They attest to your willingness to
*be* released and to offer time to the Holy Spirit for His use of it.
How long is an instant? It is as short for your brother as it is for
you. Practice giving this blessed instant of freedom to all who are
enslaved by time and thus make time their friend *for* them. The Holy
Spirit gives their blessed instant to *you* through your giving it. As
you give it, He offers it to *you*.

^14^ Be not unwilling to give what you would receive of Him, for you
join with Him in giving. In the crystal cleanness of the release you
give is your *instantaneous* escape from guilt. You *must* be holy if
you offer holiness. How long is an instant? As long as it takes to
reestablish perfect sanity, perfect peace, and perfect love for
everyone, for God, and for *yourself*. As long as it takes to remember
immortality and your immortal creations who share it with you. As long
as it takes to exchange hell for Heaven. Long enough to transcend all of
the ego's making and ascend unto your Father.

^15^ Time is your friend if you leave it to the Holy Spirit to use. He
needs but very little to restore God's whole power to you. He Who
transcends time for you understands what time is *for*. Holiness lies
not in time but in eternity. There never was an instant in which God's
Son could lose his purity. His changeless state is beyond time, for his
purity remains forever beyond attack and without variability. Time
stands still in his holiness and changes not. And so it is no longer
time at all. For, caught in the single instant of the eternal sanctity
of God's creation, it is transformed into forever. *Give* the eternal
instant that eternity may be remembered *for* you in that shining
instant of perfect release. Offer the miracle of the holy instant
through the Holy Spirit and leave His giving it to you to Him.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Time and Eternity**](#part0004.html#level-120) {#part0020_split_002.html#h1-120 .level1a}

^16^ The Atonement is *in* time but not *for* time. Being in you, it is
eternal. What holds remembrance of God cannot be bound by time. No more
are you. For unless God is bound, you *cannot* be. An instant offered to
the Holy Spirit is offered to God on your behalf, and in that instant
you will awaken gently in Him. In the blessed instant, you will let go
all your past learning, and the Holy Spirit will quickly offer you the
whole lesson of peace. What can take time, when all the obstacles to
learning it have been removed? Truth is so far beyond time that all of
it happens at once. For as it was created one, so its oneness depends
not on time at all.

^17^ Do not be concerned with time and fear not the instant of holiness
which will remove *all* fear. For the instant of peace is eternal
*because* it is wholly without fear. It *will* come, being the lesson
God gives you through the Teacher He has appointed to translate time
into eternity. Blessed is God's Teacher, Whose joy it is to teach God's
holy Son his holiness. His joy is not contained in time. His teaching is
for you because His joy is *yours.* Through Him you stand before God's
altar, where He gently translates hell into Heaven. For it is only in
Heaven that God would have you be.

^18^ How long can it take to be where God would have you? For you *are*
where you have forever been and will forever be. All that you have, you
have forever. The blessed instant reaches out to encompass time, as God
extends Himself to encompass you. You who have spent days, hours, and
even years in chaining your brothers to your egos in an attempt to
support it and uphold its weakness, do not perceive the Source of
*strength*. In the holy instant, you will unchain *all* your brothers
and refuse to support either *their* weakness or your *own*.

^19^ You do not realize how much you have misused your brothers by
seeing them as sources of ego support. As a result, they witness *to*
the ego in your perception and *seem* to provide reasons for not letting
it go. Yet they are far stronger and much more compelling witnesses for
the Holy Spirit. And they support His *strength*. It is, therefore, your
choice whether they support the ego or the Holy Spirit in *you*. And you
will know which you have chosen by *their* reactions. A Son of God who
has been released through the Holy Spirit in a brother, if the release
is *complete*, is *always* recognized. He cannot *be* denied. As long as
you remain uncertain, it can be only because you have not given complete
release. And because of this, you have not given one single instant
*completely* to the Holy Spirit. For when you have, you will be sure you
have. You will be *sure* because the witness to Him will speak so
clearly of Him that you will hear and *understand*.

^20^ You will doubt until you hear *one* witness whom you have wholly
released through the Holy Spirit. And then you will doubt no more. The
holy instant has not yet happened to you. Yet it will, and you will
recognize it with perfect certainty. No gift of God is recognized in any
other way. You can practice the mechanics of the holy instant and will
learn much from doing so. Yet its shining and glittering brilliance,
which will literally blind you to this world by its own vision, you
cannot supply. And here it is, *all* in this instant, complete,
accomplished, and given *wholly.*

^21^ Start now to practice your little part in separating out the holy
instant. You will receive very specific instructions as you go along. To
learn to separate out this single second and begin to experience it as
timeless, is to begin to experience yourself as *not* separate. Fear not
that you will not be given help in this. God's Teacher and His lesson
will support your strength. It is only your weakness that will depart
from you in this practice, for it is the practice of the power of God in
you. Use it but for one instant, and you will never deny it again. Who
can deny the Presence of what the universe bows to in appreciation and
gladness? Before the recognition of the universe which witnesses to It,
your doubts *must* disappear.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Littleness versus Magnitude**](#part0004.html#level-121) {#part0020_split_003.html#h1-121 .level1a}

^22^ Be not content with littleness, but be sure you understand what
littleness is and why you could never be content with it. Littleness is
the offering you gave *yourself*. You offered this in place of
magnitude, and you *accepted* it. Everything in this world is little
because it is a world made out of littleness in the strange belief that
littleness can content you. When you strive for anything in this world
with the belief that it will bring you peace, you are belittling
yourself and blinding yourself to glory. Littleness and glory are the
choices open to your striving and your vigilance. You will always choose
one at the *expense* of the other.

^23^ Yet what you do not realize each time you choose is that your
choice is your evaluation of *yourself*. Choose littleness and you will
not have peace, for you will have judged yourself unworthy of it. And
whatever you offer as a substitute is much too poor a gift to satisfy
you. It is essential that you accept the fact, and accept it gladly,
that there is no form of littleness that can *ever* content you. You are
free to try as many as you wish, but all you will be doing is to delay
your homecoming. For you will be content only in magnitude, which is
your home.

^24^ There is a deep responsibility you owe yourself, and one which you
must learn to remember all the time. The lesson will seem hard at first,
but you will learn to love it when you realize that it is true and
constitutes a tribute to your power. You who have sought and found
littleness, remember this: Every decision which you make stems from what
you think you *are* and represents the value that you *put* upon
yourself. Believe the little can content you, and by limiting yourself,
you will not be satisfied. For your function is *not* little, and it is
only by finding your function and fulfilling it that you can escape from
littleness.

^25^ There is no doubt about what your function is, for the Holy Spirit
*knows* what it is. There is no doubt about its magnitude, for it
reaches you through Him *from* Magnitude. You do not have to strive for
it because you *have* it. All your striving must be directed *against*
littleness, for it *does* require vigilance to protect your magnitude in
this world. To hold your magnitude in perfect awareness in a world of
littleness is a task the little cannot undertake. Yet it is asked of you
in tribute to your magnitude and *not* your littleness. Nor is it asked
of you alone.

^26^ The power of God will support every effort you make on behalf of
His dear Son. Search for the little, and you deny yourself His power.
God is not willing that His Son be content with less than everything.
For He is not content without His Son, and His Son cannot be content
with less than His Father has given him. We asked you once before,
"Would you be hostage to the ego or host to God?" Let this question be
asked you by the Holy Spirit in you every time you make a decision. For
every decision you make *does* answer this and invites sorrow or joy
accordingly.

^27^ When God gave Himself to you in your creation, He established you
as host to Him forever. He has not left you, and you have not left Him.
All your attempts to deny His magnitude and make His Son hostage to the
ego cannot make little whom God has joined with Him. Every decision you
make is for Heaven or for hell and will bring you awareness of what you
decided *for*. The Holy Spirit can hold your magnitude, clean of all
littleness, clearly and in perfect safety in your minds, untouched by
every little gift the world of littleness would offer you. But for this,
you cannot side *against* Him in what He wills for you.

^28^ Decide for God through Him. For littleness and the belief that you
can be content with littleness are the decisions you have made about
yourself. The power and the glory that lie in you from God are for all
who, like you, perceive themselves as little and have deceived
themselves into believing that littleness can be blown up by them into a
sense of magnitude that can content them. Neither give littleness, nor
accept it. All honor is due the host of God. Your littleness deceives
you, but your magnitude is of Him Who dwells in you and in Whom you
dwell. Touch no one, then, with littleness, in the name of Christ,
eternal Host unto His Father.

^29^ In this season (Christmas), which celebrates the birth of holiness
into this world, join with me, who decided for holiness for *you*. It is
our task *together* to restore the awareness of magnitude to the host
whom God appointed for Himself. It is beyond all your littleness to give
the gift of God, but *not* beyond *you*. For God would give Himself
*through* you. He reaches from you to everyone and beyond everyone to
His Son's creations, but without leaving you. Far beyond your little
world but still in you, He extends forever. Yet He brings all his
extensions to you as host to Him.

^30^ Is it a sacrifice to leave littleness behind and wander not in
vain? It is not sacrifice to wake to glory. But it *is* a sacrifice to
accept anything *less* than glory. Learn that you *must* be worthy of
the Prince of Peace, born in you in honor of Him Whose host you are. You
know not what love means because you have sought to purchase it with
little gifts, thus valuing it too little to be able to understand its
magnitude. Love is *not* little, and love dwells in you, for you are
host to Him. Before the greatness that lives in you, your poor
appreciation of yourself and all the little offerings you have given
slip into nothingness. Holy Child of God, when will you learn that
*only* holiness can content you and give you peace?

^31^ Remember that you learn not for yourself alone, no more than I did.
It is *because* I learned for you that you can learn of me. I would but
teach you what is yours, so that together we can replace the shabby
littleness that binds the host of God to guilt and weakness with the
glad awareness of the glory that is in him. My birth in you is your
awakening to grandeur. Welcome me not into a manger but into the altar
to holiness, where holiness abides in perfect peace. My Kingdom is not
of this world because it is in *you.* And you are of your Father. Let us
join in honoring you, who must remain forever beyond littleness.

^32^ Decide with me, who have decided to abide with you. I will as my
Father wills, knowing His Will is constant and at peace forever with
Itself. You will be content with nothing *but* His Will. Accept no less,
remembering that everything I learned is yours. What my Father loves, I
love as He does, and I can no more accept it as what it is not than He
can. And no more can *you*. When you have learned to accept what you
are, you will make no more gifts to offer to yourselves, for you will
know you are complete, in need of nothing, and unable to accept
*anything* for yourself. But you will gladly give, *having* received.
The host of God need not seek to find anything.

^33^ If you are wholly willing to leave salvation to the plan of God and
unwilling to attempt to grasp for peace yourself, salvation will be
*given* you. Yet think not you can substitute your plan for His. Rather,
join with me in His that we may release all those who would be bound,
proclaiming together that the Son of God is host to Him. Thus will we
let no one forget what *you* would remember. And thus will you remember
it.

^34^ Call forth in everyone only the remembrance of God and of the
Heaven that is in him. For where you would help your brother be, there
will you think *you* are. Hear not his call for hell and littleness, but
only his call for Heaven and greatness. Forget not that his call is
yours, and answer him with me. God's power is forever on the side of His
host, for it protects only the peace in which He dwells. Lay not
littleness before His holy altar, which rises above the stars and
reaches even to Heaven because of what is given it.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Practicing the Holy Instant**](#part0004.html#level-122) {#part0020_split_004.html#h1-122 .level1a}

^35^ This course is not beyond *immediate* learning unless you prefer to
believe that what God wills takes time. And this means only that you
would *rather* delay the recognition that His Will is so. The holy
instant is *this* one and *every* one. The one you *want* it to be it
*is*. The one you would not have it be is lost to you. *You* must decide
on when it is. Delay it not. For beyond the past and future, in which
you will not find it, it stands in shimmering readiness for your
acceptance. Yet you cannot bring it into glad awareness while you do not
want it, for it holds the whole release from littleness.

^36^ Your practice must therefore rest upon your willingness to let all
littleness go. The instant in which magnitude will dawn upon you is but
as far away as your *desire* for it. As long as you desire it not and
cherish littleness instead, by so much is it far from you. By so much as
you want it will you bring it nearer. Think not that you can find
salvation in your own way and *have* it. Give over *every* plan that you
have made for your salvation in exchange for God's. His will content
you, and there is nothing else that can bring you peace. For peace is of
God and of no one beside Him.

^37^ Be humble before Him and yet great *in* Him. And value no plan of
the ego before the plan of God. For you leave empty your place in His
plan, which you must fulfill if you would join with me, by your decision
to join in any plan *but* His. I call you to fulfill your holy part in
the plan that He has given to the world for its release from littleness.
God would have His host abide in perfect freedom. Every allegiance to a
plan of salvation that is apart from Him diminishes the value of His
Will for you in your own minds. And yet it is your mind that *is* the
host to Him.

^38^ Would you learn how perfect and immaculate is the holy altar on
which your Father has placed Himself? This you will recognize in the
holy instant in which you willingly and gladly give over every plan but
His. For there lies peace, perfectly clear because you have been willing
to meet its conditions. You can claim the holy instant any time and
anywhere you want it. In your practice, try to give over every plan you
have accepted for finding magnitude in littleness. *It is not there*.
Use the holy instant only to recognize that you alone *cannot* know
where it is and can only deceive yourself.

^39^ I stand within the holy instant, as clear as you would have me. And
the extent to which you learn to be willing to accept me is the measure
of the time in which the holy instant will be yours. I call to you to
make the holy instant yours at once, for the release from littleness in
the mind of the host of God depends on willingness and *not* on time.
The reason why this course is simple is that *truth* is simple.
Complexity is of the ego and is nothing more than the ego's attempt to
obscure the obvious.

^40^ You could live forever in the holy instant, *beginning now* and
reaching to eternity, but for a very simple reason. Do not obscure the
simplicity of this reason, for if you do, it will be only because you
prefer not to recognize it and not to let it go. The simple reason,
simply stated, is this: The holy instant is a time in which you receive
and *give* perfect communication. This means, however, that it is a time
in which your mind is *open*, both to receive and give. It is the
recognition that all minds *are* in communication. It therefore seeks to
*change* nothing, but merely to *accept* everything.

^41^ How can you do this when you would prefer to have *private*
thoughts and *keep* them? The only way you could do *that* is to *deny*
the perfect communication that makes the holy instant what it is. You
believe that it is possible to harbor thoughts you would not share and
that salvation lies in keeping your thoughts to yourself *alone.* For in
private thoughts, known only to yourself, you think you find a way to
keep what you would *have* alone and share what *you* would share. And
then you wonder why it is that you are not in full communication with
those around you and with God Who surrounds *all* of you together.

^42^ Every thought you would keep hidden shuts communication off because
you would *have* it so. It is impossible to recognize perfect
communication while *breaking* communication holds value to you. Ask
yourselves honestly, "Would I *want* to have perfect communication, and
am I wholly willing to let everything that interferes with it go
forever?" If the answer is no, then the Holy Spirit's readiness to give
it to you is not enough to make it yours, for you are not ready to
*share* it with Him. And it cannot come into a mind that has decided to
oppose it. For the holy instant is given and received with *equal*
willingness, being the acceptance of the single Will that governs *all*
thought.

^43^ The necessary condition for the holy instant does *not* require
that you have no thoughts which are not pure. But it *does* require that
you have none that you would *keep*. Innocence is not of your making. It
is given you the instant you would *have* it. Yet it would not be
Atonement if there were no *need* for Atonement. You will not be able to
accept perfect communication as long as you would *hide* it from
yourself. For what you would hide *is* hidden from you.

^44^ In your practice, then, try only to be vigilant against deception
and seek not to protect the thoughts you would keep unto yourself. Let
the Holy Spirit's purity shine them away and bring all your awareness to
the readiness for purity He offers you. Thus will He make you ready to
acknowledge that you *are* host to God and hostage to no one and
nothing.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Holy Instant and Special Relationships**](#part0004.html#level-123) {#part0020_split_005.html#h1-123 .level1a}

^45^ The holy instant is the Holy Spirit's most useful learning device
for teaching you love's meaning. For its purpose is to suspend judgment
*entirely.* Judgment always rests on the past, for past experience is
the basis on which you judge. Judgment becomes impossible without the
past, for without it you do not understand anything. You would make no
attempt to judge because it would be quite apparent to you that you do
not know what anything *means.* You are afraid of this because you
believe that *without* the ego all would be chaos. Yet I assure you that
without the ego all would be *love*.

^46^ The past is the *ego's* chief learning device, for it is in the
past that you learned to define your own needs and acquired methods for
meeting them on your own terms. We said before that to limit love to
*part* of the Sonship is to bring guilt into your relationships and thus
make them unreal. If you seek to separate out certain aspects of the
totality and look to them to meet your imagined needs, you are
attempting to use separation to *save* you. How, then, could guilt *not*
enter? For separation *is* the source of guilt, and to appeal to it for
salvation is to believe you are alone. To be alone *is* to be guilty.
For to experience yourself as alone is to deny the oneness of the Father
and his Son and thus to attack reality.

^47^ You cannot love parts of reality and understand what love means. If
you would love unlike to God, Who *knows* no special love, how *can* you
understand it? To believe that *special* relationships, with *special*
love, can offer you salvation is the belief that separation *is*
salvation. For it is the complete *equality* of the Atonement in which
salvation lies. How can you decide that special aspects of the Sonship
can give you more than others? The *past* has taught you this. Yet the
holy instant teaches you it *is* not so.

^48^ Because of guilt, *all* special relationships have some elements of
fear in them. And this is why they shift and change so frequently. They
are not based on changeless love alone. And love where fear has entered
cannot be depended on because it is not perfect. In His function as
Interpreter of what you have made, the Holy Spirit *uses* special
relationships, which *you* have chosen to support the ego, as a learning
experience which points to truth. Under His teaching, *every*
relationship becomes a lesson in love.

^49^ The Holy Spirit knows no one is special. Yet He also perceives that
you have *made* special relationships, which He would purify and not let
you destroy. However unholy the reason why you made them may be, He can
translate them into holiness by removing as much fear as you will let
Him. You can place any relationship under His care and be sure that it
will not result in pain if you offer Him your willingness to have it
serve no need but His. All the guilt in it arises from *your* use of it.
All the love from His. Do not, then, be afraid to let go your imagined
needs, which would destroy the relationship. Your *only* need is His.

^50^ Any relationship which you would substitute for another has not
been offered to the Holy Spirit for His use. There *is* no substitute
for love. If you would attempt to substitute one aspect of love for
another, you have placed *less* value on one and *more* on the other.
You have not only *separated* them, but you have also judged against
*both*. Yet you had judged against yourself first, or you would never
have imagined that you needed them as they were not. Unless you had seen
yourself as *without* love, you could not have judged them so like you
in lack.

^51^ The ego's use of relationships is so fragmented that it frequently
goes even farther---one part of one aspect suits its purposes, while it
prefers different parts of another aspect. Thus does it assemble reality
to its own capricious liking, offering for your seeking a picture whose
likeness does not exist. For there is nothing in Heaven or earth that it
resembles, and so however much you seek for its reality, you cannot find
it because it is not real.

^52^ Everyone on earth has formed special relationships, and although
this is not so in Heaven, the Holy Spirit knows how to bring a touch of
Heaven to them here. In the holy instant no one is special, for your
personal needs intrude on no one to make them different. Without the
values from the past, you *would* see them all the same and like
*yourself*. Nor would you see any separation between yourself and them.
In the holy instant, you see in each relationship what it *will* be when
you perceive only the present.

^53^ God knows you *now*. He remembers nothing, having *always* known
you exactly as He knows you now. The holy instant parallels His knowing
by bringing *all* perception out of the past, thus removing the frame of
reference you have built by which to judge your brothers. Once this is
gone, the Holy Spirit substitutes His frame of reference for it. His
frame of reference is simply God. The Holy Spirit's timelessness lies
only here. For in the holy instant, free of the past, you see that love
is in you, and you have no need to look *without* and snatch it guiltily
from where you thought is was.

^54^ *All* your relationships are blessed in the holy instant because
the blessing is not limited. In the holy instant, the Sonship gains *as
one*. And united in your blessing, it *becomes* one to you. The meaning
of love is the meaning God gave to it. Give to it any meaning *apart*
from His, and it is impossible to understand it. Every brother God loves
as He loves you---neither less nor more. He needs them all equally, and
so do *you.* In time you have been told to offer miracles as Christ
directs and let the Holy Spirit bring to you those who are seeking you.
Yet in the holy instant, you unite directly with God, and *all* your
brothers join in Christ. Those who are joined in Christ are in no way
separate. For Christ is the Self the Sonship shares, as God shares His
Self with Christ.

^55^ Think you that you can judge the Self of God? God has created it
*beyond* judgment out of His need to extend His Love. With love in you,
you have no need *except* to extend it. In the holy instant, there is no
conflict of needs, for there is only *one*. For the holy instant reaches
to eternity and to the Mind of God. And it is only there love *has*
meaning, and only there *can* it be understood.

^56^ It is impossible to use one relationship at the expense of another
and *not* suffer guilt. And it is equally impossible to condemn part of
a relationship and find peace *within* it. Under the Holy Spirit's
teaching, *all* relationships are seen as total commitments, yet they do
not conflict with one another in any way. Perfect faith in each one for
its ability to satisfy you *completely* arises only from perfect faith
in *yourself*. And this you cannot have while guilt remains. And there
*will* be guilt as long as you accept the possibility, and *cherish* it,
that you can make a brother what he is not because *you* would have him
so.

^57^ You have so little faith in yourself because you are unwilling to
accept the fact that perfect love is in *you*. And so you seek without
for what you cannot *find* without. I offer you my perfect faith in you
in place of all your doubt. But forget not that my faith must be as
perfect in all your brothers as it is in you, or it would be a limited
gift to *you.* In the holy instant, we share our faith in God's Son
because we recognize together that he is wholly worthy of it, and in our
appreciation of his worth, we *cannot* doubt his holiness. And so we
love him.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Holy Instant and the Laws of God**](#part0004.html#level-124) {#part0020_split_006.html#h1-124 .level1a}

^58^ All separation vanishes as holiness is shared. For holiness is
power, and by sharing it, it *gains* in strength. If you seek for
satisfaction in gratifying your needs as *you* perceive them, you must
believe that strength comes from another, and what *you* gain *he
loses*. Someone must *always* lose if you perceive yourself as weak. Yet
there is another interpretation of relationships which transcends the
concept of loss of power completely.

^59^ You do not find it difficult to believe that, when another calls on
God for love, *your* call remains as strong. Nor do you think that, by
God's answer to him, *your* hope of answer is diminished. On the
contrary, you are far more inclined to regard his success as witness to
the possibility of *yours*. That is because you recognize, however
dimly, that God is an *idea*, and so your faith in Him is *strengthened*
by sharing. What you find difficult to accept is the fact that, like
your Father, *you* are an idea. And like Him, you can give yourself
completely, *wholly* without loss, and *only* with gain.

^60^ Herein lies peace, for here there *is* no conflict. In the world of
scarcity, love has no meaning, and peace is impossible. For gain and
loss are *both* accepted, and so no one is aware that perfect love is in
him. In the holy instant, you recognize the *idea* of love in you and
unite this idea with the Mind that thought it and could not *relinquish*
it. By holding it within itself, there *was* no loss. The holy instant
thus becomes a lesson in how to hold all of your brothers in your mind,
experiencing not loss, but *completion*. From this it follows you can
*only* give. And this *is* love, for this alone is natural under the
laws of God.

^61^ In the holy instant, the laws of God prevail, and only they have
meaning. The laws of this world cease to hold any meaning at all. When
the Son of God accepts the laws of God as what he gladly wills, it is
impossible that he be bound or limited in any way. In this instant, he
is as free as God would have him be. For the instant he *refuses* to be
bound, he is *not* bound.

^62^ In the holy instant, nothing happens that has not always been. Only
the veil that has been drawn *across* reality is lifted. Nothing has
changed. Yet the *awareness* of changelessness comes swiftly as the veil
of time is pushed aside. No one who has not yet experienced the lifting
of the veil and felt himself drawn irresistibly into the light behind it
can have faith in love *without* fear. Yet the Holy Spirit *gives* you
this faith because He offered it to me and I *accepted* it. Fear not the
holy instant will be denied you, for I denied it not. And through me the
Holy Spirit gave it unto you, as *you* will give it. Let no need that
you perceive obscure your need of this. For in the holy instant, you
will recognize the only need the aspects of the Son of God share
equally, and by this recognition you will join with me in *offering*
what is needed.

^63^ It is through *us* that peace will come. Join me in the *idea* of
peace, for in ideas minds *can* communicate. If you would give
*yourself* as your Father gives His Self, you will learn to understand
selfhood. And therein is love's meaning understood. But remember that
understanding is of the *mind* and *only* of the mind. Knowledge is
therefore of the mind, and its conditions are in the mind with it. If
you were not only an idea and *nothing else,* you could not be in full
communication with all that ever was. Yet as long as you *prefer* to be
something else, or would attempt to be nothing else and something else
*together,* the language of communication, which you know perfectly, you
will not remember.

^64^ In the holy instant God is remembered, and the language of
communication with all your brothers is remembered with Him. For
communication is remembered *together,* as is truth. There is no
exclusion in the holy instant because the past is gone and with it goes
the whole *basis* for exclusion. Without its source, exclusion vanishes.
And this permits *your* Source and that of all your brothers to replace
it in your awareness. God and the power of God will take their rightful
place in you, and you will experience the full communication of ideas
with ideas. Through your ability to do this, you will learn what you
*must* be, for you will begin to understand what your Creator is and
what His creation is along with Him.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Holy Instant and Communication**](#part0004.html#level-125) {#part0020_split_007.html#h1-125 .level1a}

^65^ Beyond the poor attraction of the special love relationship and
*always* obscured by it is the powerful attraction of the Father for His
Son. There is no other love that can satisfy you, because there *is* no
other love. This is the *only* love that is fully given and fully
returned. Being complete, it asks nothing. Being wholly pure, everyone
joined in it *has* everything. This is not the basis for *any*
relationship in which the ego enters. For every relationship on which
the ego embarks *is* special. The ego establishes relationships only to
*get* something. And it would keep the giver bound to itself through
guilt.

^66^ It is impossible for the ego to enter into any relationship without
anger, for the ego believes that anger makes *friends.* This is not its
statement, but it *is* its purpose. For the ego really *believes* that
it can get and keep *by making guilty*. This is its *one* attraction; an
attraction so weak that it would have no hold at all, except that no one
*recognizes* it. For the ego always *seems* to attract through love and
has no attraction at all to anyone who perceives that it attracts
through *guilt.*

^67^ The sick attraction of guilt must be recognized for what it *is*.
For having been made real to you, it is essential to look at it clearly,
and by withdrawing your *investment* in it, to learn to let it go. No
one would choose to let go what he believes has value. Yet the
attraction of guilt has value to you only because you have *not* looked
at what it is and have judged it completely in the dark. As we bring it
to light, your only question will be why it was you *ever* wanted it.
You have nothing to lose by looking open-eyed at this, for ugliness such
as this belongs not in your holy mind. The host of God *can* have no
real investment here.

^68^ We said before that the ego attempts to maintain and increase
guilt, but in such a way that you do not recognize what it would do to
*you*. For it is the ego's fundamental doctrine that what you do to
others, *you have escaped.* The ego wishes *no one* well. Yet its
survival depends on your belief that *you* are exempt from its evil
intentions. It counsels, therefore, that if you are host to *it*, it
will enable you to direct the anger that it holds outward, thus
*protecting* you. And thus it embarks on an endless, unrewarding chain
of special relationships, forged out of anger and dedicated to but one
insane belief---that the more anger you invest *outside* yourself, the
safer *you* become.

^69^ It is this chain that binds the Son of God to guilt, and it is this
chain the Holy Spirit would remove from his holy mind. For the chain of
savagery belongs not around the chosen host of God, who *cannot* make
himself host to the ego. In the name of his release, and in the name of
Him Who would release him, let us look more closely at the relationships
which the ego contrives, and let the Holy Spirit judge them truly. For
it is certain that, if you will *look* at them, you will offer them
gladly to Him. What *He* can make of them, you do not know, but you will
become willing to find out if you are willing, first, to perceive what
*you* have made of them.

^70^ In one way or another, every relationship which the ego makes is
based on the idea that by *sacrificing* itself, it becomes *bigger*. The
"sacrifice," which it regards as purification, is actually the root of
its bitter resentment. For it would much prefer to attack directly and
avoid delaying what it *really* wants. Yet the ego acknowledges
"reality" as it sees it and recognizes that no one could interpret
*direct* attack as love. Yet to make guilty *is* direct attack but does
not *seem* to be. For the guilty *expect* attack, and having *asked* for
it, they are *attracted* to it.

^71^ In these insane relationships, the attraction of what you do not
want seems to be much stronger than the attraction of what you *do.* For
each one thinks that he has sacrificed something to the other and
*hates* him for it. Yet this is what he thinks he *wants*. He is not in
love with the other at all. He merely believes he is in love with
*sacrifice.* And for this sacrifice, which he demanded of *himself*, he
demands the *other* accept the guilt and sacrifice himself as well.
Forgiveness becomes impossible, for the ego believes that to forgive
another is to *lose* him. For it is only by attack *without* forgiveness
that the ego can ensure the guilt which holds all its relationships
together.

^72^ Yet they only *seem* to be together. For relationships, to the ego,
mean only that *bodies* are together. It is always physical closeness
that the ego demands, and it does not object where the *mind* goes or
what *it* thinks, for this seems unimportant. As long as the body is
there to receive its sacrifice, it is content. To the ego, the mind is
private, and only the *body* can be shared. Ideas are basically of no
concern, except as they draw the body of another closer or farther. And
it is in these terms that it evaluates ideas as good or bad. What makes
another guilty and *holds* him through guilt is "good." What *releases*
him from guilt is "bad," because he would no longer believe that bodies
communicate, and so he would be "gone."

^73^ Suffering and sacrifice are the gifts with which the ego would
"bless" all unions. And those who are united at its altar *accept*
suffering and sacrifice as the price of union. In their angry alliances,
born of the fear of loneliness and yet dedicated to the *continuance* of
loneliness, they seek relief from guilt by increasing it in the *other*.
For they believe that this decreases it in *them*. The other seems
always to be attacking and wounding *them*, perhaps in little ways,
perhaps "unconsciously," yet never without demand of sacrifice. The fury
of those joined at the ego's altar far exceeds your awareness of it. For
what the ego *really* wants, you do not realize.

^74^ Whenever you are angry, you can be sure that you have formed a
special relationship which the ego has "blessed," for anger *is* its
blessing. Anger takes many forms, but it cannot long deceive those who
will learn that love brings no guilt at all, and what brings guilt
cannot be love and *must* be anger. *All* anger is nothing more than an
attempt to make someone feel guilty, and this attempt is the *only*
basis which the ego accepts for special relationships. Guilt is the only
need the ego has, and as long as you identify with it, guilt will
*remain* attractive to you.

^75^ Yet remember this---to be with a body is *not* communication. And
if you think it is, you will feel guilty about communication and will be
*afraid* to hear the Holy Spirit, recognizing in His voice your *own*
need to communicate. The Holy Spirit *cannot* teach through fear. And
how can He communicate with you while you believe that to communicate is
to make yourself *alone*? It is clearly insane to believe that by
communicating you will be abandoned. And yet you *do* believe it. For
you think that your minds must be kept private or you will *lose* them,
and if your *bodies* are together your minds remain your own. The union
of bodies thus becomes the way in which you would keep *minds* apart.
For bodies cannot forgive. They can only do as the mind directs.

^76^ The illusion of the autonomy of the body and *its* ability to
overcome loneliness is but the working of the ego's plan to establish
its *own* autonomy. As long as you believe that to be with a body is
companionship, you will be compelled to attempt to keep your brother in
his body, held there by guilt. And you will see *safety* in guilt and
*danger* in communication. For the ego will *always* teach that
loneliness is solved by guilt and that communication is the *cause* of
loneliness. And despite the evident insanity of this lesson, you have
*learned* it.

^77^ Forgiveness lies in communication as surely as damnation lies in
guilt. It is the Holy Spirit's teaching function to instruct those who
believe that communication is damnation that communication is
*salvation*. And He will do so, for the power of God in Him *and* you is
joined in *real* relationship, so holy and so strong that it can
overcome even *this* without fear. It is through the holy instant that
what seems impossible is *accomplished*, making it evident that it is
*not* impossible. In the holy instant, guilt holds *no* attraction,
since communication has been restored. And guilt, whose *only* purpose
is to disrupt communication, has no function here.

^78^ Here there is no concealment and no private thoughts. The
willingness to communicate attracts communication *to* it and overcomes
loneliness completely. There is complete forgiveness here, for there is
no desire to exclude anyone from your completion in sudden recognition
of the value of his part in it. In the protection of *your* wholeness,
all are invited and made welcome. And you understand that your
completion is God's, Whose only need is to have *you* be complete. For
your completion makes you His in your awareness. And here it is that you
experience yourself as you were created and as you *are*.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Holy Instant and Real Relationships**](#part0004.html#level-126) {#part0020_split_008.html#h1-126 .level1a}

^79^ The holy instant does not replace the need for learning, for the
Holy Spirit must not leave you as your Teacher until the holy instant
has extended far beyond time. For a teaching assignment such as His, He
must use everything in this world for your release. He must side with
every sign or token of your willingness to learn of Him what the truth
must be. He is swift to utilize whatever you offer Him on behalf of
this. His concern and care for you are limitless. In the face of your
*fear* of forgiveness, which He perceives as clearly as He knows
forgiveness is *release,* He will teach you to remember that forgiveness
is not loss but your *salvation*. And that in *complete* forgiveness, in
which you recognize that there is nothing to forgive, *you* are absolved
completely.

^80^ Hear Him gladly and learn of Him that you have need of no special
relationships at all. You but seek in them what you have thrown away.
And through them you will never learn the value of what you have cast
aside but what you still desire with all your hearts. Let us join
together in making the holy instant all that there is by desiring that
it *be* all that there is. God's Son has such great need of your
willingness to strive for this that you cannot conceive of need so
great. Behold the only need that God and His Son share and will to meet
together. You are not alone in this. The will of your creations call to
you to share your will with them. Turn, then, in peace from guilt to God
and them.

^81^ Relate only with what will *never* leave you and what *you* can
never leave. The loneliness of God's Son is the loneliness of his
Father. Refuse not the awareness of your completion and seek not to
restore it to yourselves. Fear not to give redemption over to your
Redeemer's love. He will not fail you, for He comes from One Who
*cannot* fail. Accept *your* sense of failure as nothing more than a
mistake in who you are. For the holy host of God is beyond failure, and
nothing that he wills can *be* denied. You are forever in a relationship
so holy that it calls to everyone to escape from loneliness and join you
in your love. And where you are must everyone seek and *find* you there.

^82^ Think but an instant on this: God gave the Sonship to you to ensure
your perfect creation. This was His gift, for as He withheld Himself not
from you, He withheld not His creation. Nothing that ever was created
but is yours. Your relationships are with the universe. And this
universe, being of God, is far beyond the petty sum of all the separate
bodies *you* perceive. For all its parts are joined in God through
Christ, where they become like to their Father. For Christ knows of no
separation from His Father, Who is His one relationship, in which He
gives as His Father gives to Him.

^83^ The Holy Spirit is God's attempt to free you of what He does not
understand. And because of the Source of the attempt, it will *succeed*.
The Holy Spirit asks you to respond as God does, for He would teach you
what *you* do not understand. God would respond to *every* need,
whatever form it takes. And so He has kept this channel open to receive
His communication to you and yours to Him. God does not understand your
problem in communication, for He does not share it with you. It is only
you who believe that it *is* understandable.

^84^ The Holy Spirit knows that it is not understandable, and yet He
understands it because you have *made* it. In Him alone lies the
awareness of what God cannot know and what you do not understand. It is
His holy function to accept them both, and by removing every element of
disagreement, to join them into one. He will do this *because* it is His
function. Leave, then, what seems to you to be impossible to Him Who
knows it *must* be possible because it is the Will of God. And let Him
Whose teaching is *only* of God teach you the *only* meaning of
relationships. For God created the only relationship which has meaning,
and that is His relationship with *you*.

^85^ As the ego would limit your perception of your brothers to the
body, so would the Holy Spirit release your vision and let you see the
Great Rays shining from them, so unlimited that they reach to God. It is
this shift in vision which is accomplished in the holy instant. Yet it
is needful for you to learn just what this shift entails, so you will
become willing to make it permanent. Given this willingness, it will not
leave you, for it *is* permanent. For once you have accepted it as the
only perception you *want*, it is translated into knowledge by the part
which God Himself plays in the Atonement, for it is the only step in it
He understands. Therefore, in this there will be no delay when you are
ready for it. God is ready *now,* but *you* are not.

^86^ Our task is but to continue as fast as possible the necessary
process of looking straight at all the interference and seeing it
*exactly* as it is. For it is impossible to recognize as wholly
*without* gratification what you think you *want*. The body is the
symbol of the ego, as the ego is the symbol of the separation. And both
are nothing more than attempts to limit communication and thereby to
make it impossible. For communication must be unlimited in order to have
meaning, and *deprived* of meaning, it will not satisfy you completely.
Yet it remains the only means by which you can establish real
relationships.

^87^ Real relationships *have* no limits, having been established by
God. In the holy instant, where the Great Rays *replace* the body in
awareness, the recognition of relationships without limits is given you.
But to see this, it is necessary to give up every use the ego has for
the body and to accept the fact that the ego has *no* purpose you would
share with it. For the ego would limit everyone to a body for *its*
purposes, and while you think it *has* a purpose, you will choose to
utilize the means by which *it* tries to turn its purpose into
accomplishment. This will never *be* accomplished. Yet you have surely
recognized that the ego, whose goals are altogether unattainable, will
strive for them with all its might and will do so with the strength
which *you* have given it.

^88^ It is impossible to divide your strength between Heaven and hell,
God and the ego, and release your power unto creation, which is the only
purpose for which it was given you. Love would *always* give increase.
Limits are demanded by the ego, representing its demands to make little
and ineffectual. Limit your vision of a brother to his body, which you
*will* do as long as you would not release him from it, and you have
denied his gift to *you*. His body *cannot* give it. And seek it not
through *yours*. Yet your minds are *already* continuous, and their
union need only be accepted, and the loneliness in Heaven is gone.

^89^ If you would but let the Holy Spirit tell you of the love of God
for you and the need your creations have to be with you forever, you
would experience the attraction of the eternal. No one can hear Him
speak of this and long remain willing to linger here. For it *is* your
will to be in Heaven, where you are complete and quiet in such sure and
loving relationships that *any* limit is impossible. Would you not
exchange your little relationships for this? For the body *is* little
and limited, and only those whom you would see *without* the limits the
ego would impose on them can offer you the gift of freedom.

^90^ You have no conception of the limits you have placed on your
perception and no idea of all the loveliness that you could see. But
this you must remember---the attraction of guilt *opposes* the
attraction of God. His attraction for you remains unlimited, but because
your power, being His, is as great as His, you can turn away from love.
What you invest in guilt, you withdraw from God. And your sight grows
weak and dim and limited, for you have attempted to separate the Father
from the Son and limit their communication. Seek not Atonement in
*further* separation. And limit not your vision of God's Son to what
*interferes* with his release and what the Holy Spirit must *undo* to
set him free. For his belief in limits *has* imprisoned him.

^91^ When the body ceases to attract you and when you place no value on
it as a means for getting *anything*, then there will be no interference
in communication, and your thoughts will be as free as God's. As you let
the Holy Spirit teach you how to use the body *only* for purposes of
communication and renounce its use for separation and attack which the
ego sees in it, you will learn you have no need of a body at all. In the
holy instant there *are* no bodies, and you experience only the
attraction of God. Accepting it as undivided, you join Him wholly in an
instant. \[For you would place *no* limits on your union *with* Him.\]
The reality of this relationship becomes the only truth that you could
ever *want*. All truth *is* here.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Time of Christ**](#part0004.html#level-127) {#part0020_split_009.html#h1-127 .level1a}

^92^ It *is* in your power in *time* to delay the perfect union of the
Father and the Son. For in this world, the attraction of guilt *does*
stand between them. Neither time nor season means anything in eternity.
But here it is the Holy Spirit's function to use them both, though not
as the ego uses them. This is the season when you would celebrate my
birth into the world. Yet you know not how to do it. Let the Holy Spirit
teach you, and let me celebrate *your* birth through Him. The only gift
I can accept of you is the gift I *gave* to you. Release *me* as I will
*your* release. The time of Christ we celebrate *together*, for it has
no meaning if we are apart.

^93^ The holy instant is truly the time of Christ. For in this
liberating instant, no guilt is laid upon the Son of God, and his
unlimited power is thus restored to him. What other gift can you offer
me, when only this I will to offer *you*? And to see me is to see me in
everyone and offer everyone the gift you offer me. I am as incapable of
receiving sacrifice as God is, and every sacrifice you ask of yourself,
you ask of me. Learn *now* that sacrifice of any kind is nothing but a
limitation imposed on giving. And by this limitation, you have limited
acceptance of the gift I offer *you*.

^94^ We who are one *cannot* give separately. When you are willing to
accept *our* relationship as real, guilt will hold *no* attraction for
you. For in our union, you will accept *all* of our brothers. The gift
of union is the only gift that I was born to give. Give it to me, that
*you* may have it. The time of Christ is the time appointed for the gift
of freedom, offered to everyone. And by *your* acceptance of it, you
have *offered* it to everyone. It *is* in your power to make this season
holy, for it is in your power to make the time of Christ be *now*.

^95^ It is possible to do this all at once because there is but *one*
shift in perception that is necessary, for you made but *one* mistake.
It seems like many, but it is all the same. For though the ego takes
many forms, it is *always* the same idea. What is not love is *always*
fear and nothing else. It is not necessary to follow fear through all
the circuitous routes by which it burrows underground and hides in
darkness, to emerge in forms quite different from what it is. Yet it
*is* necessary to examine each one as long as you would retain the
*principle* which governs all of them. When you are willing to regard
them not as separate but as different manifestations of the *same* idea,
and one you do not *want*, they go together. The idea is simply
this---you believe that it is possible to be host to the ego or hostage
to God. This is the choice you think you have, and the decision which
you believe that you must make.

^96^ You see no other alternatives, for you cannot accept the fact that
sacrifice gets *nothing*. Sacrifice is so essential to your thought
system that salvation *apart* from sacrifice means nothing to you. Your
confusion of sacrifice and love is so profound that you cannot conceive
of love *without* sacrifice. And it is this that you must look
upon---sacrifice is *attack*, not love. If you would accept but this
*one* idea, your fear of love would vanish. Guilt *cannot* last when the
idea of sacrifice has been removed. For if there is sacrifice, as you
are convinced, someone must pay and someone must get. And the only
question which remains to be decided is *how much* is the price for
getting *what*.

^97^ As host to the ego, you believe that you can give *all* your guilt
away *whatever* you think and purchase peace. And the payment does not
seem to be *yours*. While it is obvious that the ego *does* demand
payment, it never seems to be demanding it of *you*. For you are
unwilling to recognize that the ego, which you invited, is treacherous
only to those who think they are its host. The ego will never let you
perceive this, since this recognition would make it homeless. For when
this recognition dawns clearly, you will not be deceived by *any* form
the ego takes to protect itself from your sight.

^98^ Each form will be recognized as but a cover for the one idea that
hides behind them all---that love demands sacrifice and is therefore
inseparable from attack and fear. And that guilt is the *price* of love,
which must be paid *by* fear. How fearful, then, has God become to you,
and how great a sacrifice do you believe His love demands! For total
love would demand total sacrifice. And so the ego seems to demand less
of you than God, and of the two is judged as the lesser of two evils,
one to be feared a little, but the other to be destroyed. For you see
love as *destructive*, and your only question is who is to be destroyed,
you or another? You seek to answer this question in your special
relationships, in which you are both destroyer and destroyed in part,
but with the idea of being able to be neither completely. And this you
think saves you from God, Whose total love would completely destroy you.

^99^ You think that everyone *outside* yourself demands your sacrifice,
but you do not see that *only* you demand sacrifice and *only* of
yourself. Yet the demand of sacrifice is so savage and so fearful that
you *cannot* accept it where it is. But the *real* price of not
accepting this has been so great that you have given God away rather
than look at it. For if God would demand total sacrifice of you, you
thought it safer to project Him outward and *away* from you and not be
host to Him. To Him you ascribed the ego's treachery, inviting it to
take His place to *protect* you from Him. And you do not recognize that
it is what *you* invited in that would destroy you and *does* demand
total sacrifice of you. No partial sacrifice will appease this savage
guest, for it is an invader who but *seems* to offer kindness, but
always to make the sacrifice complete.

^100^ You will not succeed in being partial hostage to the ego, for it
keeps no bargains and would leave you nothing. \[Nor can you be partial
*host* to it.\] You will have to choose between *total* freedom and
*total* bondage, for there are no alternatives but these. You have tried
many compromises in the attempt to avoid recognizing the one decision
which must be made. And yet it is the recognition of the decision *just
as it is* that makes the decision so easy! Salvation is simple, being of
God and therefore very easy to understand. Do not try to project it from
you and see it *outside* yourself. In you are both the question and the
answer---the demand for sacrifice and the peace of God.
:::

[]{#part0020_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The End of Sacrifice**](#part0004.html#level-128) {#part0020_split_010.html#h1-128 .level1a}

^101^ Fear not to recognize the whole idea of sacrifice as *solely* of
your making. And seek not safety by attempting to protect yourself from
where it is not. Your brothers and your Father have become very fearful
to you. And you would bargain with them for a few special relationships
in which you think you see some scraps of safety. Do not try longer to
keep apart your thoughts and the Thought that has been given you. When
they are brought together and perceived where they *are*, the choice
between them is nothing more than a gentle awakening and as simple as
opening your eyes to daylight when you have no more need of sleep.

^102^ The sign of Christmas is a star, a light in darkness. See it not
outside yourself but shining in the Heaven within and accept it as the
sign the time of Christ has come. He comes demanding *nothing*. No
sacrifice of any kind of anyone is asked by Him. In His Presence, the
whole idea of sacrifice loses all meaning. For He is Host to God. And
you need but invite Him in Who is there *already,* by recognizing that
His Host is One, and no thought alien to His Oneness can abide with Him
there. Love must be total to give Him welcome, for the Presence of
Holiness *creates* the holiness which surrounds it. No fear can touch
the host who cradles God in the time of Christ, for the Host is as holy
as the Perfect Innocence which He protects and Whose power protects Him.

^103^ This Christmas, give the Holy Spirit *everything* that would hurt
you. *Let* yourself be healed completely that you may join with Him in
healing, and let us celebrate our release together by releasing everyone
with us. Leave nothing behind, for release is total, and when you have
accepted it with me, you will *give* it with me. All pain and sacrifice
and littleness will disappear in our relationship, which is as innocent
as our relationship with our Father, and as powerful. Pain will be
brought to us and disappear in our presence, and without pain there can
*be* no sacrifice. And without sacrifice, there love *must* be.

^104^ You who believe that sacrifice *is* love must learn that sacrifice
is *separation* from love. For sacrifice brings guilt as surely as love
brings peace. Guilt is the *condition* of sacrifice, as peace is the
condition for the awareness of your relationship with God. Through guilt
you exclude your Father and your brothers from yourself. Through peace
you invite them back and realize that they are where your invitation
bids them be. What you excluded from yourself seems fearful, for you
endowed it with fear and tried to cast it out though it was part of you.
Who can perceive part of himself as loathsome and live within himself in
peace? And who can try to resolve the perceived conflict of Heaven and
hell in him by casting Heaven out and giving it the attributes of hell
without experiencing himself as incomplete and lonely?

^105^ As long as you perceive the body as your reality, so long will you
perceive yourself as lonely and deprived. And so long will you also
perceive yourself as a victim of sacrifice, justified in sacrificing
others. For who could thrust Heaven and its Creator aside *without* a
sense of sacrifice and loss? And who can suffer sacrifice and loss
without attempting to *restore* himself? Yet how could you accomplish
this yourselves when the basis of your attempts is the belief in the
*reality* of the deprivation? For deprivation breeds attack, being the
belief that attack *is* justified. And as long as you would retain the
deprivation, attack becomes salvation, and sacrifice becomes love.

^106^ So is it that in all your seeking for love, you seek for sacrifice
and *find* it. Yet you find not love. It is impossible to deny what love
is and still *recognize* it. The meaning of love lies in what you have
cast *outside* yourself, and it has no meaning at all apart from you. It
is what you preferred to *keep* that has no meaning, while all that you
would keep *away* holds all the meaning of the universe and holds the
universe together in its meaning. For unless the universe were joined in
*you,* it would be apart from God, and to be without Him *is* to be
without meaning.

^107^ In the holy instant, the condition of love is met, for minds are
joined without the body's interference, and where there is
communication, there is peace. The Prince of Peace was born to
reestablish the condition of love by teaching that communication remains
unbroken, even if the body is destroyed, provided that you see not the
body as the *necessary* means of communication. And if you understand
this lesson, you will realize that to sacrifice the body is to sacrifice
*nothing*, and communication, which *must* be of the mind, cannot be
sacrificed. Where, then, *is* sacrifice?

^108^ The lesson I was born to teach and still would teach to all my
brothers is that sacrifice is nowhere and love is everywhere. For
communication embraces *everything*, and in the peace it re-establishes,
love comes of itself. Let no despair darken the joy of Christmas, for
the time of Christ is meaningless apart from joy. Let us join in
celebrating peace by demanding no sacrifice of anyone, for so will you
offer me the love I offer you. What can be more joyous than to perceive
we are deprived of *nothing*? Such is the message of the time of Christ,
which I give you that *you* may give it and return it to the Father, Who
gave it to me. For in the time of Christ, communication is restored, and
He joins us in the celebration of His Son's creation.

^109^ God offers thanks to the holy host who would receive Him and let
Him enter and abide where He would be. And by your welcome does He
welcome you into Himself, for what is contained in you who welcome Him
is *returned* to Him. And we but celebrate His Wholeness as we welcome
Him into ourselves. Those who receive the Father are one with Him, being
host to Him Who created them. And by allowing Him to enter, the
remembrance of the Father enters with Him, and with Him they remember
the only relationship they ever had and ever *want to have*.

^110^ This is the weekend in which a new year will be born from the time
of Christ. I have perfect faith in you to do all that you would
accomplish. Nothing will be lacking, and you will make complete and
*not* destroy. Say and understand this:

^111^ I give you to the Holy Spirit as part of myself.\
I know that you will be released, unless I want to\
use you to imprison myself.\
In the name of my freedom I will your release,\
Because I recognize that we will be released together.

^112^ So will the year begin in joy and freedom. There is much to do,
and we have been long delayed. Accept the holy instant as this year is
born and take your place, so long left unfulfilled, in the Great
Awakening. Make this year different by making it all the *same.* And let
*all* your relationships be made holy *for* you. This is our will. Amen.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Sixteen**](#part0004.html#chap-16) {#part0021_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Forgiveness of Illusions**](#part0004.html#chap-16) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-129) {#part0021_split_000.html#h1-129 .level1a1}

^16:1^ To empathize does not mean to join in *suffering*, for that is
what you must *refuse* to understand. That is the *ego's* interpretation
of empathy and is always used to form a special relationship in which
the suffering is shared. The capacity to empathize is very useful to the
Holy Spirit, provided you let Him use it in His way. \[His way is very
different.\] He does not understand suffering and would have you teach
it is not *understandable.* When He relates through you, He does not
relate through the ego to another ego. He does not join in pain, knowing
that healing pain is not accomplished by delusional attempts to enter
into it and lighten it by sharing the delusion.

^2^ The clearest proof that empathy as the ego uses it is destructive
lies in the fact that it is applied only to certain types of problems
and in certain people. These it selects *out* and joins *with*. And it
never joins except to strengthen *itself.* \[Having identified with what
it *thinks* it understands, it sees *itself* and would *increase* itself
by sharing what is *like* itself.\] Make no mistake about this maneuver;
the ego always empathizes to *weaken*, and to weaken is *always* to
attack. You do not know what empathizing means. Yet of this you may be
sure---if you will merely sit quietly by and let the Holy Spirit relate
through you, you will empathize with *strength* and *both* of you will
gain in strength, and not in weakness.

^3^ Your part is only to remember this---you do not want anything *you*
value to come of the relationship. You will neither to hurt it nor to
heal it in your own way. You do not know what healing is. All you have
learned of empathy is from the *past.* And there is nothing from the
past that you would share, for there is nothing there that you would
*keep*. Do not use empathy to make the past real and so perpetuate it.
Step gently aside and let the healing be done *for* you. Keep but one
thought in mind and do not lose sight of it, however tempted you may be
to judge any situation and to determine your response *by* judging it.
Focus your mind only on this:

^4^ I am not alone, and I would not intrude\
the past upon my Guest.\
I have invited Him, and He is here.\
I need do nothing except not to interfere.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. True Empathy**](#part0004.html#level-130) {#part0021_split_001.html#h1-130 .level1a}

^5^ True empathy is of Him Who knows what it *is*. You will learn His
interpretation of it if you let Him use your capacity for *strength* and
*not* for weakness. He will not desert you, but be sure that *you*
desert not *him.* Humility is strength in this sense only---to recognize
and accept the fact that you do *not* know is to recognize and accept
the fact that He *does* know. You are not sure that He will do His part
because you have never yet done *yours* completely. You will not know
how to respond to what you do not understand. Be tempted not in this,
and yield not to the ego's triumphant use of empathy for *its* glory.

^6^ The triumph of weakness is not what you would offer to a brother.
And yet you know no triumph *but* this. This is not knowledge, and the
form of empathy that would bring this about is so distorted that it
would imprison what it would release. The unredeemed cannot redeem, yet
they *have* a Redeemer. Attempt to teach Him not. *You* are the learner;
He the Teacher. Do not confuse your role with His, for this will never
bring peace to anyone. Offer your empathy to Him, for it is *His*
perception and *His* strength that you would share. And let Him offer
you His strength and His perception to be shared through you.

^7^ The meaning of love is lost in any relationship which looks to
weakness and hopes to find love there. The power of love, which *is* its
meaning, lies in the strength of God, which hovers over it and blesses
it silently by enveloping it in healing wings. *Let* this be, and do not
try to substitute *your* "miracle" for this. We once said that if a
brother asks a foolish thing of you, to do it. But be certain that this
does not mean to do a foolish thing that would hurt either him *or* you,
for what would hurt one *will* hurt the other. Foolish requests are
foolish for the simple reason that they conflict because they contain an
element of specialness. Only the Holy Spirit recognizes foolish needs as
well as real ones. And He will teach you how to meet both without losing
either.

^8^ *You* will attempt to do this only in secrecy. And you will think
that, by meeting the needs of one, you do not jeopardize another because
you keep them separate and secret from each other. That is not the way,
for it leads not to light and truth. No needs will long be left unmet if
you leave them all to Him Whose *function* is to meet them. That is
*His* function and *not* yours. He will not meet them secretly, for He
would share everything you give through Him. And that is *why* He gives
it.

^9^ What you give through Him is for the whole Sonship, *not* for part
of it. Leave Him His function, for He will fulfill it if you but ask Him
to enter your relationships and bless them *for* you.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Magnitude of Holiness**](#part0004.html#level-131) {#part0021_split_002.html#h1-131 .level1a}

^10^ You still think holiness is difficult because you cannot see how it
can be extended to include everyone. And you have learned that it *must*
include everyone to *be* holy. Concern yourselves not with the extension
of holiness, for the nature of miracles you do not understand. Nor do
*you* do them. It is their extension, far beyond the limits you
perceive, that demonstrates you did *not* do them. Why should you worry
how the miracle extends to all the Sonship when you do not understand
the miracle itself? One attribute is no more difficult to understand
than is the whole. If miracles *are* at all, their attributes would
*have* to be miraculous, being part of them.

^11^ There is a tendency to fragment and then to be concerned about the
truth of just a little part of the whole. And this is but a way of
avoiding or *looking away* from the whole to what you think you might be
better able to understand. For this is but another way in which you
would still try to keep understanding to *yourself*. A better and *far*
more helpful way to think of miracles is this: You do not understand
them, either in part *or* whole. Yet you have *done* them. Therefore,
your understanding cannot be necessary. Yet it is still impossible to
accomplish what you do not understand. And so there must be something in
you that *does* understand.

^12^ To you the miracle *cannot* seem natural because what you have done
to hurt your minds has made them so *unnatural* that they do not
remember what is natural to them. And when you are *told* about it, you
cannot understand it. The recognition of the part as whole and of the
whole in every part is *perfectly* natural. For it is the way God
thinks, and what is natural to Him *is* natural to you. Wholly natural
perception would show you instantly that order of difficulty in miracles
is quite impossible, for it involves a contradiction of what miracles
mean. And if you could understand their meaning, their attributes could
hardly cause you perplexity.

^13^ You *have* done miracles, but it is quite apparent that you have
not done them alone. You have succeeded whenever you have reached
another mind and *joined* with it. When two minds join as one and share
one idea equally, the first link in the awareness of the Sonship as one
has been made. When you have made this joining as the Holy Spirit bids
you and have offered it to Him to use as He knows how, His natural
perception of your gift enables *Him* to understand it and *you* to use
His understanding on your behalf. It is impossible to convince you of
the reality of what has clearly *been* accomplished through your
willingness, as long as you believe that *you* must understand it or
else it is not real.

^14^ You think your lack of understanding is a *loss* to you, and so you
are unwilling to believe that what has happened is true. But can you
*really* believe that all that has happened, even though you do *not*
understand it, has *not* happened? Yet this *is* your position. You
would have perfect faith in the Holy Spirit and in the effects of His
teaching if you were not afraid to *acknowledge* what He taught you. For
this acknowledgment means that what has happened you do not understand
but that you are willing to accept it *because* it has happened.

^15^ How can faith in reality be yours while you are bent on making it
unreal? And are you *really* safer in maintaining the unreality of what
has happened than you would be in joyously accepting it for what it is
and giving thanks for it? Honor the truth that has been given you, and
be glad you do not understand it. Miracles are natural to God and to the
One Who speaks for Him. For His task is to translate the miracle into
the knowledge which it represents and which is lost to you. Let His
understanding of the miracle be enough for you, and do not turn away
from all the witnesses that He has given you to His reality.

^16^ No evidence will convince you of the truth of what you do not want.
Yet your relationship with Him *is* real and *has* been demonstrated.
Regard this not with fear but with rejoicing. The One you called upon
*is* with you. Bid Him welcome and honor His witnesses, who bring you
the glad tidings He has come. It is true, just as you fear, that to
acknowledge Him *is* to deny all that you think you know. But it was
*never* true. What gain is there to you in clinging to it and denying
the evidence for truth? For you have come too near to truth to renounce
it now, and you *will* yield to its compelling attraction. You can delay
this now but only a little while. The host of God has called to you, and
you *have* heard. Never again will you be wholly willing not to listen.

^17^ This is a year of joy in which your listening will increase, and
peace will grow with its increase. The power of holiness and the
*weakness* of attack have *both* been brought into awareness. And this
has been accomplished in minds firmly convinced that holiness is
weakness and attack is power. Should not this be a sufficient miracle to
teach you that your Teacher is *not* of you? But remember also that
whenever you have listened to His interpretation, the results have
brought you joy. Would you prefer the results of *your* interpretation,
considering honestly what they have been? God wills you better. Could
you not look with greater charity on whom God loves with perfect love?

^18^ Do not interpret *against* God's Love, for you have many witnesses
which speak of it so clearly that only the blind and deaf could fail to
see and hear them. This year, determine not to deny what has been given
you by God\[. Awake and share it\], for that is the only reason He has
called to you. His Voice has spoken clearly, and yet you have so little
faith in what you heard because you have preferred to place still
greater faith in the disaster *you* have made. Today let us resolve
*together* to accept the joyful tidings that disaster is not real and
that reality is not disaster.

^19^ Reality is safe and sure and wholly kind to everyone and
everything. There is no greater love than to accept this and be glad.
For love asks only that you be *happy* and will give you everything that
makes for happiness. You have never given any problem to the Holy Spirit
He has not solved for you, nor will you ever do so. You have never tried
to solve anything yourself and been successful. Is it not time you
brought these facts *together* and made *sense* of them?

^20^ This is the year for the *application* of the ideas which have been
given you. For the ideas are mighty forces to be used and not held idly
by. They have already proved their power sufficiently for you to place
your faith in them and not in their denial. This year invest in truth,
and let it work in peace. Have faith in what has faith in *you*. Think
what you have *really* seen and heard and *recognize* it. Can you be
alone with witnesses like these?
:::

[]{#part0021_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Reward of Teaching**](#part0004.html#level-132) {#part0021_split_003.html#h1-132 .level1a}

^21^ You have taught well, and yet you have not learned how to *accept*
the comfort of your teaching. If you will consider what you have taught
and how alien it is to what you thought you knew, you will be compelled
to recognize that your Teacher came from beyond your thought system and
so could look upon it fairly and perceive it was untrue. And He must
have done so from the basis of a very different thought system and one
with *nothing* in common with yours. For certainly what He has taught,
and what you have taught through Him, have nothing in common with what
you taught before He came. And the results have been to bring peace
where there was pain, and suffering has disappeared, to be replaced by
joy.

^22^ You have taught freedom, but you have not learned how to be free.
We once said, "By their fruits ye shall know them, and they shall know
themselves." For it is certain that you judge yourself according to your
teaching. The ego's teaching produces immediate results because its
decisions are immediately accepted as *your* choice. And this acceptance
means that you are willing to judge yourself accordingly. Cause and
effect are very clear in the ego's thought system because all your
learning has been directed towards *establishing* the relationship
between them. And would you not have faith in what you have so
diligently taught yourself to believe? Yet remember how much care you
have exerted in choosing its witnesses and in avoiding those which spoke
for the cause of truth and *its* effects.

^23^ Does not the fact that you have not learned what you have taught
show you that you do not perceive the Sonship as one? And does it not
also show you that you do not regard *yourself* as one? For it is
impossible to teach successfully wholly *without* conviction, and it is
equally impossible that conviction be *outside* of you. You could never
have taught freedom unless you *did* believe in it. And it must be that
what you taught came from *yourself*. And yet, this Self you clearly do
not *know* and do not recognize It even though It functions. What
functions must be *there.* And it is only if you deny what It has *done*
that you could possibly deny Its Presence.

^24^ This is a course in how to know yourself. You *have* taught what
you are but have not let what you are teach *you*. You have been very
careful to avoid the obvious and not to see the *real* cause and effect
relationship that is perfectly apparent. Yet within you is *everything*
you taught. What can it be that has *not* learned it? It must be this
that is *really* outside yourself, not by your own projection, but in
*truth.* And it is this that you have taken in that is *not* you. What
you accept into your minds does not *really* change them. Illusions are
but beliefs in what is not there. And the seeming conflict between truth
and illusion can only be resolved by separating yourself from the
*illusion* and *not* from truth.

^25^ Your teaching has already done this, for the Holy Spirit is part of
*you*. Created by God, He left neither God nor His creation. He is both
God *and* you, as you are God and Him together. For God's answer to the
separation added more to you than you tried to take away. He protected
both your creations and you together, keeping one with you what you
would exclude. And they will take the place of what you took in to
replace them. They are quite real as part of the Self you do not know.
And they communicate to you through the Holy Spirit, and their power and
gratitude to you for their creation they offer gladly to your teaching
of yourself, who is their home. You who are host to God are also host to
them. For nothing real has ever left the mind of its creator. And what
is not real was never *there*.

^26^ You are not two selves in conflict. What is beyond God? If you who
hold Him and whom He holds *are* the universe, all else must be
*outside*, where *nothing* is. You have taught this, and from far off in
the universe, yet not beyond yourself, the witnesses to your teaching
have gathered to help you learn. Their gratitude has joined with yours
and God's to strengthen your faith in what you taught. For what you
taught is true. Alone you stand outside your teaching and *apart* from
it. But *with* them you must learn that you but taught *yourself* and
learned from the conviction you shared with them.

^27^ This year you will begin to learn and make learning commensurate
with teaching. You have chosen this by your own willingness to teach.
Though you seemed to suffer for it, the joy of teaching will yet be
yours. For the joy of teaching is in the *learner*, who offers it to the
teacher in gratitude and shares it with him. As you learn, your
gratitude to your Self, Who teaches you what He is, will grow and help
you honor Him. And you will learn His power and strength and purity, and
love Him as His Father does. His Kingdom has no limits and no end, and
there is nothing in Him that is not perfect and eternal. All this is
*you*, and nothing outside of this *is* you.

^28^ To your most holy Self, all praise is due for what you are and for
what He is Who created you as you are. Sooner or later must everyone
bridge the gap which he imagines exists between his selves. Each one
builds this bridge which carries him *across* the gap as soon as he is
willing to expend some little effort on behalf of bridging it. His
little efforts are powerfully supplemented by the strength of Heaven and
by the united will of all who make Heaven what it is, being joined
within it. And so the one who would cross over is literally transported
there.

^29^ Your bridge is builded stronger than you think, and your foot is
planted firmly on it. Have no fear that the attraction of those who
stand on the other side and wait for you will not draw you safely
across. For you *will* come where you would be and where your Self
awaits you.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Illusion and Reality of Love**](#part0004.html#level-133) {#part0021_split_004.html#h1-133 .level1a}

^30^ Be not afraid to look upon the special hate relationship, for
freedom lies in looking at it. It would be impossible not to know the
meaning of love except for this. For the special love relationship, in
which the meaning of love is *lost*, is undertaken solely to offset the
hate but *not* to let it go. Your salvation will rise clearly before
your open eyes as you look on this. You cannot *limit* hate. The special
love relationship will not offset it but will merely drive it
underground and out of sight. It is essential to bring it *into* sight
and to make no attempt to hide it. For it is the attempt to balance hate
with love that *makes* love meaningless to you. The extent of the split
that lies in this you do not realize. And *until* you do, the split will
remain unrecognized and therefore unhealed.

^31^ The symbols of hate against the symbols of love play out a conflict
which does not exist. For symbols stand for something *else*, and the
symbol of love is without meaning if love is everything. You will go
through this last undoing quite unharmed and will at last emerge as
yourself. This is the last step in the readiness for God. Be not
unwilling now. You are too near, and you will cross the bridge in
perfect safety, translated quietly from war to peace. For the illusion
of love will *never* satisfy, but its reality, which awaits you on the
other side, will give you everything.

^32^ The special love relationship is an attempt to limit the
destructive effects of hate by finding a haven in the storm of guilt. It
makes no attempt to rise *above* the storm into the sunlight. On the
contrary, it emphasizes guilt *outside* the haven by attempting to build
barricades against it and keep within them. The special love
relationship is not perceived as a value in itself, but as a place of
safety from which hatred is split off and kept apart. The special love
partner is acceptable only as long as he serves this purpose. Hatred can
enter and indeed is welcome in *some* aspects of the relationship, but
it is still held together by the illusion of love. If the illusion goes,
the relationship is broken or becomes unsatisfying on the grounds of
disillusionment.

^33^ Love is *not* an illusion. It is a fact. Where disillusionment is
possible, there was not love but hate. For hate *is* an illusion, and
what can change was *never* love. It is certain that those who select
certain ones as partners in any aspect of living and use them for any
purpose which they would not share with others, are trying to *live*
with guilt rather than *die* of it. This is the choice they see. And
love to them is only an escape from death. They seek it desperately but
not in the peace in which it would gladly come quietly *to* them. And
when they find the fear of death is still upon them, the love
relationship *loses* the illusion that it is what it is not. For then
the barricades against it are broken, fear rushes in, and hatred
triumphs.

^34^ There are no triumphs of love. Only hate is concerned with the
"triumph of love" at all. The illusion of love *can* triumph over the
illusion of hate, but always at the price of making *both* illusions. As
long as the illusion of hatred lasts, so long will love be an illusion
to you. And then the only choice which remains possible is which
illusion you prefer. There *is* no conflict in the choice between truth
and illusion. Seen in *these* terms, no one would hesitate. But conflict
enters the instant the choice seems to be one between *illusions*, for
this choice does not matter. Where one choice is as dangerous as the
other, the decision *must* be one of despair.

^35^ Your task is not to seek for love but merely to seek and find *all*
of the barriers within yourself which you have built *against* it. It is
not necessary to seek for what is true, but it *is* necessary to seek
for what is false. Every illusion is one of fear, whatever form it
takes. And the attempt to escape from one illusion into another *must*
fail. If you seek love outside yourself, you can be certain that you
perceive hatred within and are *afraid* of it. Yet peace will never come
from the illusion of love, but *only* from its reality.

^36^ Recognize this, for it is true, and truth *must* be recognized if
it is to be distinguished from illusion: The special love relationship
is an attempt \[to bring *love into separation*. And, as such, it is
nothing more than an attempt\] to bring love into fear and make it
*real* in fear. In fundamental violation of love's condition, the
special love relationship would accomplish the impossible. How but in
illusion *could* this be done? It is essential that we look very closely
at exactly what it is you think you can do to solve the dilemma, which
seems very real to you, but which does not exist. You have come very
close to truth, and only this stands between you and the bridge that
leads you into it.

^37^ Heaven waits silently, and your creations are holding out their
hands to help you cross and welcome them. For it is *they* you *seek*.
You seek but for your own completion, and it is they who render you
complete. The special love relationship is but a shabby substitute for
what makes you whole in truth, *not* in illusion. Your relationship with
them is without guilt, and this enables you to look on all your brothers
with gratitude because your creations were created in union *with* them.
Acceptance of your creations is the acceptance of the oneness of
creation, without which you could never *be* complete. No specialness
can offer you what God has given and what you are joined with Him in
giving.

^38^ Across the bridge is your completion, for you will be wholly in
God, willing for nothing special but only to be wholly like unto Him,
completing Him by *your* completion. Fear not to cross to the abode of
peace and perfect holiness. Only there is the completion of God and of
His Son established forever. Seek not for this in the bleak world of
illusion, where nothing is certain, and where everything fails to
satisfy. In the Name of God, be wholly willing to abandon *all*
illusions. In any relationship in which you are wholly willing to accept
completion, and *only* this, there is God completed and His Son with
Him.

^39^ The bridge that leads to union in yourself *must* lead to
knowledge, for it was built with God beside you and will lead you
straight to Him, where your completion rests wholly compatible with His.
Every illusion which you accept into your mind by judging it to be
attainable removes your own sense of completion and thus denies the
wholeness of your Father. Every fantasy, be it of love or hate, deprives
you of knowledge, for fantasies are the veil behind which truth is
hidden. To lift the veil which seems so dark and heavy, it is only
needful to value truth beyond *all* fantasy and to be entirely unwilling
to settle for illusion *in place* of truth.

^40^ Would you not go *through* fear to love? For such the journey seems
to be. Love calls, but hate would have you stay. Hear not the call of
hate, and see no fantasies\[, for your completion lies in truth and
*nowhere else*\]. See in the call of hate and in every fantasy that
rises to delay you but the call for help which rises ceaselessly from
you to your Creator. Would He not answer you whose completion is His? He
loves you wholly without illusion, as you must love. For love *is*
wholly without illusion and therefore wholly without fear. Whom God
remembers *must* be whole. And God has never forgotten what makes *Him*
whole. In your completion lies the memory of His wholeness and His
gratitude to you for His completion. In His link with you lie both His
inability to forget and your ability to remember. In Him are joined your
willingness to love and all the love of God, Who forgot you not.

^41^ Your Father can no more forget the truth in you than you can fail
to remember it. The Holy Spirit is the bridge to Him, made from your
willingness to unite with Him and created by His joy in union with you.
The journey that seemed to be endless is almost complete, for what *is*
endless is very near. You have almost recognized it. Turn with me firmly
away from all illusions *now*, and let nothing stand in the way of
truth. We will take the last foolish journey *away* from truth together,
and then together we go straight to God in joyous answer to His call for
His completion.

^42^ If special relationships of any kind would hinder God's completion,
*can* they have value to you? What would interfere with God *must*
interfere with you. Only in time does interference in God's completion
seem to be possible. The bridge that He would carry you across lifts you
from time into eternity. Waken from time and answer fearlessly the call
of Him Who gave eternity to you in your creation. On this side of the
bridge to timelessness you understand nothing. But as you step lightly
across it, upheld *by* timelessness, you are directed straight to the
Heart of God. At its center, and *only* there, you are safe forever
because you are *complete* forever. There is no veil the love of God in
us together cannot lift. The way to truth is open. Follow it with me.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Specialness and Guilt**](#part0004.html#level-134) {#part0021_split_005.html#h1-134 .level1a}

^43^ In looking at the special relationship, it is necessary first to
realize that it involves a great amount of pain. Anxiety, despair,
guilt, and attack all enter into it, broken into by periods in which
they *seem* to be gone. All these must be understood for what they are.
Whatever form they take, they are always an attack on the self to make
the *other* guilty. We have spoken of this before, but there are some
aspects of what is really being attempted that we have not touched upon.

^44^ Very simply, the attempt to make guilty is *always* directed
against God. For the ego would have you see Him, and Him *alone,* as
guilty, leaving the Sonship open to attack and unprotected from it. The
special love relationship is the ego's chief weapon for keeping you from
Heaven. It does not *appear* to be a weapon, but if you consider *how*
you value it and *why,* you will realize what it must be. The special
love relationship is the ego's most boasted gift, and one which has the
most appeal to those unwilling to relinquish guilt. The "dynamics" of
the ego are clearest here, for counting on the attraction of this
offering, the fantasies which center around it are often quite open.
Here they are usually judged to be acceptable and even natural. No one
considers it bizarre to love and hate together, and even those who
believe that hate is sin merely feel guilty and do not correct it.

^45^ This *is* the "natural" condition of the separation, and those who
learn that it is not natural at all seem to be the *unnatural* ones. For
this world *is* the opposite of Heaven, being *made* to be its opposite,
and everything here takes a direction exactly opposite of what is true.
In Heaven, where the meaning of love is known, love is the same as
*union.* Here, where the illusion of love is accepted in love's place,
love is perceived as separation and *exclusion*.

^46^ It is in the special relationship, born of the hidden wish for
special love from God, that the ego's hatred triumphs. For the special
relationship is the *renunciation* of the love of God and the attempt to
secure for the self the specialness which He denied. It is essential to
the preservation of the ego that you believe this specialness is not
hell, but Heaven. For the ego would never have you see that separation
can *only* be loss, being the one condition in which Heaven *cannot* be.

^47^ To everyone Heaven is completion. There can be no disagreement on
this because both the ego and the Holy Spirit accept it. They are,
however, in *complete* disagreement on what completion *is* and *how* it
is accomplished. The Holy Spirit knows that completion lies first in
union and then in the extension of union. To the ego, completion lies in
triumph and in the extension of the "victory" even to the final triumph
over God. In this it sees the ultimate freedom of the self, for nothing
would remain to interfere with *it.* This *is* its idea of Heaven. From
this it follows that union, which is a condition in which the ego
*cannot* interfere, *must* be hell.

^48^ The special relationship is a strange and unnatural ego device for
joining hell and Heaven and making them indistinguishable. And the
attempt to find the imagined "best" of both worlds has merely led to
fantasies of both and to the inability to perceive either one as it is.
The special relationship is the triumph of this confusion. It is a kind
of union from which union is *excluded*, and the basis for the *attempt*
at union rests on exclusion. What better example could there be of the
ego's maxim, "Seek but do not find?"

^49^ Most curious of all is the concept of the self which the ego
fosters in the special relationship. This "self" seeks the relationship
to make itself complete. Yet when it *finds* the special relationship in
which it thinks it can accomplish this, it gives itself *away* and tries
to "trade" itself for the self of another. This is not union, for there
is no increase and no extension. Each partner tries to sacrifice the
self he does not want for one he thinks he would prefer. And he feels
guilty for the "sin" of taking and of giving nothing of value in return.
For how much value *can* he place upon a self that he would give away to
get a better one?

^50^ The "better" self the ego seeks is always one that is *more*
special. And whoever seems to possess a special self is "loved" for what
can be taken *from* him. Where both partners see this special self in
each other, the ego sees "a union made in Heaven." For neither one will
recognize that he has asked for hell, and so he will not interfere with
the ego's illusion of Heaven, which it offered him to *interfere* with
Heaven. Yet if all illusions are of fear, and they *can* be of nothing
else, the illusion of Heaven is nothing more than an "attractive" form
of fear in which the guilt is buried deep and rises in the form of
"love."

^51^ The appeal of hell lies only in the terrible attraction of guilt,
which the ego holds out to those who place their faith in littleness.
The conviction of littleness lies in *every* special relationship, for
only the deprived could *value* specialness. The demand for specialness
and the perception of the giving of specialness as an act of love would
make love *hateful*. And the real purpose of the special relationship,
in strict accordance with the ego's goals, is to destroy reality and
substitute illusion. For the ego is *itself* an illusion, and only
illusions *can* be the witnesses to its "reality."

^52^ If you perceived the special relationship as a triumph over God,
would you *want* it? Let us not think of its fearful nature nor of the
guilt it must entail nor of the sadness and the loneliness. For these
are only attributes of the whole religion of the separation and of the
total context in which it is thought to occur. The central theme in its
litany to sacrifice is that God must die so *you* can live. And it is
this theme which is acted out in the special relationship. Through the
death of *your* self, you think you can attack another self and snatch
it from the other to replace the self which you despise. And you despise
it because you do not think it offers the specialness which you demand.
And *hating* it, you have made it little and unworthy because you are
*afraid* of it.

^53^ How can you grant unlimited power to what you think you have
attacked? So fearful has the truth become to you that *unless* it is
weak and little, \[and unworthy of value,\] you would not dare to look
upon it. You think it safer to endow the little self which you have made
with power you *wrested* from truth, triumphing over it and leaving it
helpless. See how *exactly* is this ritual enacted in the special
relationship. An altar is erected in between two separate people on
which each seeks to kill his self and on his body raise another self
which takes its power from his death. Over and over and over this ritual
is enacted. And it is *never* completed nor ever *will* be completed.
For the ritual of completion *cannot* complete, and life arises not from
death, nor Heaven from hell.

^54^ Whenever any form of special relationship tempts you to seek for
love in ritual, remember love is *content* and not form of *any* kind.
The special relationship is a *ritual* of form, aimed at the raising of
the form to take the place of God at the *expense* of content. There
*is* no meaning in the form, and there will never be. The special
relationship must be recognized for what it is---a senseless ritual in
which strength is extracted from the death of God and invested in His
killer as the sign that form has triumphed over content and love has
lost its meaning. Would you *want* this to be possible, even apart from
its evident impossibility? For if it *were* possible, you would have
made *yourself* helpless. God is not angry. He merely could not let this
happen. You *cannot* change His Mind.

^55^ No rituals that you have set up in which the dance of death
delights you can bring death to the eternal. Nor can your chosen
substitute for the wholeness of God have any influence at all upon it.
See in the special relationship nothing more than a meaningless attempt
to raise other gods before Him and by worshiping them to obscure *their*
tininess and His *greatness*. In the name of your completion, you do not
*want* this. For every idol which you raise to place before Him stands
before *you* in place of what you *are.*

^56^ Salvation lies in the simple fact that illusions are not fearful
because they are not *true*. They but seem to be fearful to the extent
to which you fail to recognize them for what they are, and you *will*
fail to do this to the extent to which you *want* them to be true. And
to the same extent you are *denying* truth, and so are making yourself
unable to make the simple choice between truth and illusion, God and
fantasy. Remember this and you will have no difficulty in perceiving the
decision as just what it *is* and nothing more.

^57^ The core of the separation delusion lies simply in the *fantasy* of
destruction of love's meaning. And unless love's meaning is *restored*
to you, you cannot know yourself, who *shares* its meaning. Separation
is only the decision *not* to know yourself. Its whole thought system is
a carefully contrived learning experience designed to lead *away* from
truth and into fantasy. Yet for every learning that would hurt you, God
offers you correction and complete escape from *all* its consequences.
The decision whether or not to listen to this course and follow it is
but the choice between truth and illusion. For here is truth *separated*
from illusion and not confused with it at all.

^58^ How simple does this choice become when it is perceived as only
what it is. For *only* fantasies made confusion in choosing possible,
and they are totally unreal. This year is thus the time to make the
easiest decision that ever confronted you and also the *only* one. You
will cross the bridge into reality simply because you will recognize
that God is on the other side and nothing *at all* is here. It is
impossible *not* to make the natural decision as this is realized.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Bridge to the Real World**](#part0004.html#level-135) {#part0021_split_006.html#h1-135 .level1a}

^59^ The search for the special relationship is the sign that you equate
yourself with the ego and not with God. For the special relationship has
value *only* to the ego. To the ego *unless* a relationship has special
value, it has *no* meaning, and it perceives *all* love as special. Yet
this *cannot* be natural, for it is unlike the relationship of God and
His Son, and all relationships that are unlike this one *must* be
unnatural. For God created love as He would have it be and gave it as it
*is*. Love has no meaning except as its Creator defined it by His Will.
It is impossible to define it otherwise and *understand* it.

^60^ Love is *freedom*. To look for it by placing yourself in bondage is
to *separate* yourself from it. For the love of God, no longer seek for
union in separation nor for freedom in bondage! As you release, so will
you be released. Forget this not, or love will be unable to find you and
comfort you. There is a way in which the Holy Spirit asks your help if
you would have His. The holy instant is His most helpful tool in
protecting you from the attraction of guilt, the real lure in the
special relationship. You do not recognize that this *is* its real
appeal, for the ego has taught you that *freedom* lies in it. Yet the
closer you look at the special relationship, the more apparent it
becomes that it *must* foster guilt and therefore *must* imprison.

^61^ The special relationship is totally without meaning without a body.
And if you value it, you must *also* value the body. And what you value,
you *will* keep. The special relationship is a device for limiting
*your* self to a body and for limiting your perception of others to
*theirs*. The Great Rays would establish the total *lack* of value of
the special relationship if they were seen. For in seeing them, the body
would disappear because its *value* would be lost. And so your whole
investment in seeing it would be withdrawn from it. You see the world
you *value*.

^62^ On this side of the bridge, you see the world of separate bodies
seeking to join each other in separate unions and to become one by
losing. When *two* individuals seek to become one, they are trying to
*decrease* their magnitude. Each would deny his power, for the
*separate* union excludes the universe. Far more is left outside than
would be taken in. For God is left without and *nothing* taken in. If
*one* such union were made in perfect faith, the universe *would* enter
into it. Yet the special relationship which the ego seeks does not
include even one whole individual. For the ego wants but *part* of him
and sees *only* this part and nothing else.

^63^ Across the bridge, it is so different! For a time the body is still
seen but not exclusively, as it is seen here. For the little spark which
holds the Great Rays within it is *also* visible, and this spark cannot
be limited long to littleness. Once you have crossed the bridge, the
value of the body is so diminished in your sight that you will see no
need at all to magnify it. For you will realize that the only value
which the body has is to enable you to bring your brothers to the bridge
*with* you and to be released *together* there.

^64^ The bridge itself is nothing more than a transition in your
perspective of reality. On this side, everything you see is grossly
distorted and completely out of perspective. What is little and
insignificant is magnified, and what is strong and powerful cut down to
littleness. In the transition there is a period of confusion in which a
sense of actual disorientation seems to occur. But fear it not, for it
means nothing more than that you have been willing to let go your hold
on the distorted frame of reference which seemed to hold your world
together. This frame of reference is built around the special
relationship. *Without* this illusion, there can *be* no meaning you
would still seek here.

^65^ Fear not that you will be abruptly lifted up and hurled into
reality. Time is kind, and if you use it *for* reality, it will keep
gentle pace with you in your transition. The urgency is only in
dislodging your minds from their fixed position here. This will not
leave you homeless and without a frame of reference. The period of
disorientation which precedes the actual transition is far shorter than
the time it took to fix your minds so firmly on illusions. Delay will
hurt you now more than before only because you realize it *is* delay and
that escape from pain is really possible. Find hope and comfort rather
than despair in this: You could no longer find even the *illusion* of
love in any special relationship here. For you are no longer wholly
insane, and you would recognize the guilt of self-betrayal for what it
*is.*

^66^ Nothing you seek to strengthen in the special relationship is
*really* part of you. And you cannot keep part of the thought system
which taught you it was real and understand the Thought that *really*
knows what you are. You *have* allowed the Thought of your reality to
enter your minds, and because you invited it, it *will* abide with you.
Your love for it will not allow you to betray yourself, and you could
not enter into a relationship where it could not go with you, for you
would not *be* apart from it.

^67^ Be glad you have escaped the mockery of salvation which the ego
offered you and look not back with longing on the travesty it made of
your relationships. Now no one need suffer, for you have come too far to
yield to the illusion of the beauty and holiness of guilt. Only the
wholly insane could look on death and suffering, sickness and despair
and see it thus. What guilt has wrought is ugly, fearful, and very
dangerous. See no illusion of truth and beauty there. And be you
thankful that there *is* a place where truth and beauty wait for you. Go
on to meet them gladly, and learn how much awaits you for the simple
willingness to give up nothing *because* it is nothing.

^68^ The new perspective you will gain from crossing over will be the
understanding of where Heaven *is*. From here it seems to be outside and
across the bridge. Yet as you cross to join it, it will join with *you*
and become one with you. And you will think in glad astonishment that
for all this you gave up *nothing*! The joy of Heaven, which has no
limit, is increased with each light that returns to take its rightful
place within it. Wait no longer, for the love of God and *you*. And may
the holy instant speed you on the way, as it will surely do if you but
let it come to you.

^69^ The Holy Spirit asks only this little help of you. Whenever your
thoughts wander to a special relationship which still attracts you,
enter with Him into a holy instant and there let Him release you. He
needs only your willingness to *share* His perspective to give it to you
completely. And your willingness need not be complete because *His* is
perfect. It is His task to atone for your unwillingness by His perfect
faith, and it is His faith you share with Him there. Out of your
recognition of your unwillingness for your release, His *perfect*
willingness is given you. Call upon Him, for Heaven is at His call. And
*let* Him call on Heaven *for* you.
:::

[]{#part0021_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The End of Illusions**](#part0004.html#level-136) {#part0021_split_007.html#h1-136 .level1a}

^70^ It is impossible to let the past go without relinquishing the
special relationship. For the special relationship is an attempt to
*reenact* the past and *change* it. Imagined slights, remembered pain,
past disappointments, perceived injustices, and deprivations all enter
into the special relationship, which becomes a way in which you seek to
restore your wounded self-esteem. What basis would you have for choosing
a special partner *without* the past? Every such choice is made because
of something "evil" in the past to which you cling and for which must
someone else atone.

^71^ The special relationship *takes vengeance* on the past. By seeking
to remove suffering in the past, it *overlooks* the present in its
preoccupation with the past and its total commitment to it. *No* special
relationship is experienced in the present. Shades of the past envelop
it and make it what it is. It *has* no meaning in the present, and if it
means nothing *now,* it cannot have any real meaning at all. How can you
change the past *except* in fantasy? And who can give you what you think
the past deprived you of? The past is nothing. Do not seek to lay the
blame for deprivation on it, for the past is gone. You cannot really
*not* let go what has *already* gone. It must be, therefore, that you
are maintaining the illusion that it has *not* gone because you think it
serves some purpose that you want *fulfilled*. And it must also be that
this purpose could *not* be fulfilled in the present, but *only* in the
past.

^72^ Do not underestimate the intensity of the ego's drive for vengeance
on the past. It is completely savage and completely insane. For the ego
remembers everything that you have done which offended it and seeks
retribution of *you*. The fantasies it brings to the special
relationships it chooses in which to act out its hate are fantasies of
*your* destruction. For the ego holds the past *against* you, and in
your *escape* from the past, it sees itself deprived of the vengeance it
believes that you so justly merit. Yet without your alliance in your own
destruction, the ego could not hold you to the past.

^73^ In the special relationship, you are *allowing* your destruction to
be. That this is insane is obvious. But what is less obvious to you is
that the *present* is useless to you while you pursue the ego's goal as
its ally. The past is gone; seek not to preserve it in the special
relationship, which binds you to it and would teach you that salvation
is past and that you must return *to* the past to find salvation. There
is no fantasy which does not contain the dream of retribution for the
past. Would you act out the dream or let it go?

^74^ In the special relationship, it does not *seem* to be an acting out
of vengeance which you seek. And even when the hatred and the savagery
break briefly through into awareness, the illusion of love is not
profoundly shaken. Yet the one thing which the ego never allows to reach
awareness is that the special relationship is the acting out of
vengeance on *yourself.* But what else *could* it be? In seeking the
special relationship, you look not for glory in *yourself.* You have
denied that it is *there*, and the relationship becomes your
*substitute* for it. And vengeance becomes your substitute for
Atonement, and the *escape* from vengeance becomes your *loss.*

^75^ Against the ego's insane notion of salvation, the Holy Spirit
gently lays the holy instant. We said before that the Holy Spirit must
teach through comparisons and uses opposites to point to truth. The holy
instant is the *opposite* of the ego's fixed belief in salvation through
vengeance for the past. In the holy instant, it is accepted that the
past is gone, and with its passing the drive for vengeance has been
uprooted and has disappeared. The stillness and the peace of *now*
enfolds you in perfect gentleness. Everything is gone except the truth.

^76^ For a time you may attempt to bring illusions into the holy instant
to hinder your full awareness of the *complete* difference in all
respects between your experience of truth and illusion. Yet you will not
attempt this long. In the holy instant, the power of the Holy Spirit
will prevail because you *joined* Him. The illusions you bring with you
will weaken the experience of Him for a while and will prevent you from
keeping the experience in your mind. Yet the holy instant *is* eternal,
and your illusions of time will not prevent the timeless from being what
it is nor you from experiencing it as it is.

^77^ What God has given you is truly given and will be truly *received*.
For God's gifts *have* no reality apart from your receiving them. *Your*
receiving completes His *giving*. You will receive *because* it is His
Will to give. He gave the holy instant to be given you, and it is
impossible that you receive it not, *because* He gave it. When He willed
that His Son be free, His Son *was* free. In the holy instant is His
reminder that His Son will always be *exactly* as he was created. And
everything the Holy Spirit teaches you is to remind you that you *have*
received what God has given you.

^78^ There is nothing you can hold against reality. All that must be
forgiven are the illusions you have held against your brothers. Their
reality *has* no past, and only illusions can *be* forgiven. God holds
nothing against anyone, for He is incapable of illusions of *any* kind.
Release your brothers from the slavery of their illusions by forgiving
them for the illusions which *you* perceive in them. Thus will you learn
that *you* have been forgiven, for it is *you* who offered them
illusions. In the holy instant, this is done for you *in time* to bring
to you the true condition of Heaven.

^79^ Remember that you always choose between truth and
illusion---between the *real* Atonement which would heal and the ego's
"atonement" which would destroy. The power of God and all His Love,
without limit, will support you as you seek only your place in the plan
of Atonement arising from His Love. Be an ally of God and not the ego in
seeking how Atonement can come to you. His help suffices, for His
Messenger understands how to restore the Kingdom to you and to place
*all* your investment in salvation in your relationship with Him.

^80^ Seek and *find* his message in the holy instant, where all
illusions are forgiven. From there the miracle extends to bless everyone
and to resolve all problems, be they perceived as great or small,
possible or impossible. There is nothing that will not give place to Him
and to His majesty. To join in close relationship with Him is to accept
relationships as *real* and through their reality to give over all
illusions for the reality of your relationship with God. Praise be to
your relationship with Him and to no other. The truth lies here and
nowhere else. You choose this or *nothing*.

^81^ Forgive us our illusions, Father, and help us to accept our\
true relationship with You in which there are no illusions and\
where none can ever enter. Our holiness is Yours. What can\
there be in us that needs forgiveness when Yours is perfect?\
The sleep of forgetfulness is only the unwillingness to remember\
Your forgiveness and Your Love. Let us not wander into temptation,\
for the temptation of the Son of God is not Your Will. And let us\
receive only what you have given and accept but this into the minds\
which You created and which You love. Amen.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Seventeen**](#part0004.html#chap-17) {#part0022_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Forgiveness and Healing**](#part0004.html#chap-17) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-137) {#part0022_split_000.html#h1-137 .level1a1}

^17:1^ The betrayal of the Son of God lies only in illusions, and all
his "sins" are but his own imagining. His reality is forever sinless. He
need not be forgiven, but awakened. In his dreams he has betrayed
himself, his brothers, and his God. Yet what is done in dreams has not
been really done. It is impossible to convince the dreamer that this is
so, for dreams are what they are *because* of their illusion of reality.
Only in waking is the full release from them, for only then does it
become perfectly apparent that they had no effect on reality at all and
did not change it. Fantasies change reality. That is their purpose. They
cannot do so in reality, but they *can* do so in the mind that would
have reality different.

^2^ It is, then, only your wish to change reality that is fearful
because by your wish you think you have accomplished what you wish. This
strange position in a sense acknowledges your power. Yet by distorting
it and devoting it to "evil," it also makes it unreal. You cannot be
faithful to two masters who ask of you conflicting things. What you use
in fantasy you deny to truth. Yet what you give to truth to use for you
is safe from fantasy.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Fantasy and Distorted Perception**](#part0004.html#level-138) {#part0022_split_001.html#h1-138 .level1a}

^3^ When you maintain that there must be order of difficulty in
miracles, all you mean is that there are some things you would withhold
from truth. You believe that truth cannot deal with them only because
you would keep them from truth. Very simply, your lack of faith in the
power that heals all pain arises from your wish to retain some aspects
of reality for fantasy. If you but realized what this must do to your
appreciation of the whole! What you reserve unto yourself, you take away
from Him Who would release you. Unless you give it back, it is
inevitable that your perspective on reality be warped and uncorrected.

^4^ As long as you would have it so, so long will the illusion of order
of difficulty in miracles remain with you. For you have established this
order in reality by giving some of it to one teacher and some to
another. And so you learn to deal with part of truth in one way and in
another way the other part. To fragment truth is to destroy it by
rendering it meaningless. Orders of reality is a perspective without
understanding, a frame of reference for reality to which it cannot
really be compared at all.

^5^ Think you that you can bring truth to fantasy and learn what truth
means from the perspective of illusions? Truth *has* no meaning in
illusion. The frame of reference for its meaning must be itself. When
you try to bring truth to illusions, you are trying to make illusions
*real* and keep them by justifying your belief in them. But to give
illusions to truth is to enable truth to teach that the illusions are
unreal and thus enable you to escape from them. Reserve not one idea
aside from truth, or you establish orders of reality which must imprison
you. There is no order in reality because *everything* there is true.

^6^ Be willing, then, to give all you have held outside the truth to Him
who knows the truth and in Whom all is brought to truth. \[Salvation
from separation will be complete or will be not at all.\] Be not
concerned with anything except your willingness to have this be
accomplished. *He* will accomplish it; not you. But forget not this:
When you become disturbed and lose your peace of mind because another is
attempting to solve his problems through fantasy, you are refusing to
forgive yourself for just this same attempt. And you are holding both of
you away from truth and from salvation. As you forgive him, you restore
to truth what was denied by both of you. And you will see forgiveness
where you have given it.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Forgiven World**](#part0004.html#level-139) {#part0022_split_002.html#h1-139 .level1a}

^7^ Can you imagine how beautiful those you forgive will look to you? In
no fantasy have you ever seen anything so lovely. Nothing you see here,
sleeping or waking, comes near to such loveliness. And nothing will you
value like unto this nor hold so dear. Nothing that you remember that
made your heart seem to sing with joy has ever brought you even a little
part of the happiness this sight will bring you. For you will see the
Son of God. You will behold the beauty which the Holy Spirit loves to
look upon and which He thanks the Father for. He was created to see this
for you until you learn to see it for yourself. And all His teaching
leads to seeing it and giving thanks with Him.

^8^ This loveliness is not a fantasy. It is the real world, bright and
clean and new with everything sparkling under the open sun. Nothing is
hidden here, for everything has been forgiven, and there are no
fantasies to hide the truth. The bridge between that world and this is
so little and so easy to cross that you could not believe it is the
meeting place of worlds so different. Yet this little bridge is the
strongest thing that touches on this world at all. This little step, so
small it has escaped your notice, is a stride through time into eternity
and beyond all ugliness into beauty that will enchant you and will never
cease to cause you wonderment at its perfection.

^9^ This step, the smallest ever taken by anything, is still the
greatest accomplishment of all in God's plan of Atonement. All else is
learned, but this is given, complete and wholly perfect. No one but Him
Who planned salvation could complete it thus. The real world, in its
loveliness, you learn to reach. Fantasies are all undone, and no one and
nothing remains still bound by them, and by your own forgiveness, you
are free to see. Yet what you see is only what you have made, with the
blessing of your forgiveness on it. And with this final blessing of
God's Son upon himself, the real perception, born of the new perspective
he has learned, has served its purpose.

^10^ The stars will disappear in light, and the sun which opened up the
world to beauty will vanish. Perception will be meaningless when it has
been perfected, for everything that has been used for learning will have
no function. Nothing will ever change; no shifts nor shadings, no
differences, no variations which made perception possible will occur.
The perception of the real world will be so short that you will barely
have time to thank God for it. For God will take the last step swiftly
when you have reached the real world and have been made ready for Him.

^11^ The real world is attained simply by the complete forgiveness of
the old, the world you see without forgiveness. The Great Transformer of
perception will undertake with you the careful searching of the mind
that made this world and uncover to you the seeming reasons for your
making it. In the light of the real reason which He brings, as you
follow Him, He will show you that there is no reason here at all. Each
spot His reason touches grows alive with beauty, and what seemed ugly in
the darkness of your lack of reason is suddenly released to loveliness.
Not even what the Son of God made in insanity could be without a hidden
spark of beauty which gentleness could release.

^12^ All this beauty will rise to bless your sight as you look upon the
world with forgiving eyes. For forgiveness literally transforms vision
and lets you see the real world reaching quietly and gently across chaos
and removing all illusions which had twisted your perception and fixed
it on the past. The smallest leaf becomes a thing of wonder and a blade
of grass a sign of God's perfection. From the forgiven world, the Son of
God is lifted easily into his home. And there he knows that he has
always rested there in peace. Even salvation will become a dream and
vanish from his mind. For salvation is the end of dreams and with the
closing of the dream will have no meaning. Who awake in Heaven could
dream that there could ever be need of salvation?

^13^ How much do you want salvation? It will give you the real world,
trembling with readiness to be given you. The eagerness of the Holy
Spirit to give you this is so intense He would not wait, although He
waits in patience. Meet His patience with your impatience at delay in
meeting Him. Go out in gladness to meet with your Redeemer and walk with
him in trust out of this world and into the real world of beauty and
forgiveness.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Shadows of the Past**](#part0004.html#level-140) {#part0022_split_003.html#h1-140 .level1a}

^14^ To forgive is merely to remember only the *loving* thoughts you
gave in the past and those that were given you. All the rest must be
forgotten. Forgiveness is a selective remembering, based not on your
selection. For the shadow figures you would make immortal are "enemies"
of reality. Be willing to forgive the Son of God for what he did not do.
The shadow figures are the witnesses you bring with you to demonstrate
he did what he did not. Because you brought them, you will hear them.
And you who kept them by your own selection do not understand how they
came into your minds and what their purpose is.

^15^ They represent the evil that you *think* was done to you. You bring
them with you only that you may return evil for evil, hoping that their
witness will enable you to think guiltily of another and not harm
yourself. They speak so clearly for the separation that no one not
obsessed with keeping separation could hear them. They offer you the
"reasons" why you should enter into unholy alliances which support the
ego's goals and make your relationships the witness to its power. It is
these shadow figures which would make the ego holy in your sight and
teach you what you do to keep it safe is really love.

^16^ The shadow figures always speak for vengeance, and all
relationships into which they enter are totally insane. Without
exception, these relationships have as their purpose the exclusion of
the truth about the other and of yourself. This is why you see in both
what is not there and make of both the slaves of vengeance. And why
whatever reminds you of your past grievances, no matter how distorted
the associations by which you arrive at the remembrance may be, attracts
you and seems to you to go by the name of love. And finally why all such
relationships become the attempt at union through the body, for only
bodies can be seen as means for vengeance. That bodies are central to
all unholy relationships is evident. Your own experience has taught you
this. But what you do not realize are all the reasons which go to make
the relationship unholy. For unholiness seeks to reinforce itself, as
holiness does, by gathering to itself what it perceives as like itself.

^17^ In the unholy relationship, it is not the body of the other with
which union is attempted but the bodies of those who are not there. Even
the body of the other, already a severely limited perception of him, is
not the central focus as it is or in entirety. What can be used for
fantasies of vengeance and what can be most readily associated with
those on whom vengeance is really sought are centered on and separated
off as being the only parts of value. Every step taken in the making,
the maintaining, and the breaking off of the unholy relationship is a
move toward further fragmentation and unreality. The shadow figures
enter more and more, and the one in whom they seem to be decreases in
importance.

^18^ Time is indeed unkind to the unholy relationship. For time *is*
cruel in the ego's hands, as it is kind when used for gentleness. The
attraction of the unholy relationship begins to fade and to be
questioned almost at once. Once it is formed, doubt must enter in
because its purpose is impossible. The only such relationships which
retain the fantasies that center on them are those which have been
dreamed of but have not been made at all. Where no reality has entered,
there is nothing to intrude upon the dream of happiness. Yet consider
what this means-the more reality that enters into the unholy
relationship, the less satisfying it becomes. And the more the fantasies
can encompass, the greater the satisfaction seems to be.

^19^ The "ideal" of the unholy relationship thus becomes one in which
the reality of the other does not enter at all to "spoil" the dream. And
the less the other really brings to it, the "better" it becomes. Thus,
the attempt at union becomes a way of excluding even the one with whom
the union was sought. For it was formed to get him out of it and join
with fantasies in uninterrupted "bliss." How can the Holy Spirit bring
His interpretation of the body as a means of communication into
relationships whose only purpose is separation from reality? What
forgiveness is enables Him to do so.

^20^ If all but loving thoughts has been forgotten, what remains is
eternal. And the transformed past is made like the present. No longer
does the past conflict with *now*. This continuity extends the present
by increasing its reality and its value in your perception of it. In
these loving thoughts is the spark of beauty hidden in the ugliness of
the unholy relationship in which the hatred is remembered, yet there to
come alive as the relationship is given to Him Who gives it life and
beauty. That is why Atonement centers on the past, which is the source
of separation, and where it must be undone. For separation must be
corrected where it was made. The ego seeks to "resolve" its problems,
not at their source, but where they were not made. And thus it seeks to
guarantee there will be no solution.

^21^ The Holy Spirit wills only to make His resolutions complete and
perfect, and so He seeks and finds the source of problems where it is
and there undoes it. And with each step in His undoing is the separation
more and more undone and union brought closer. He is not at all confused
by any "reasons" for separation. All He perceives in separation is that
it must be undone. Let Him uncover the hidden spark of beauty in your
relationships and *show* it to you. Its loveliness will so attract you
that you will be unwilling ever to lose the sight of it again. And you
will let it transform the relationship so you can see it more and more.
For you will want it more and more and become increasingly unwilling to
let it be hidden from you. And you will learn to seek for and establish
conditions in which this beauty can be seen.

^22^ All this you will do gladly if you but let Him hold the spark
before you to light your way and make it clear to you. God's Son is one.
Whom God has joined as one, the ego cannot break apart. The spark of
holiness must be safe, however hidden it may be, in every relationship.
For the Creator of the one relationship has left no part of it without
Himself.

^23^ This is the only part of the relationship the Holy Spirit sees
because He knows that only this is true. You have made the relationship
unreal and therefore unholy by seeing it where it is not and as it is
not. Give the past to Him Who can change your mind about it for you. But
first be sure you fully realize what you have made the past to represent
and why.

^24^ In brief, the past is now your justification for entering into a
continuing, unholy alliance with the ego against the present. For the
present *is* forgiveness. Therefore, the relationships which the unholy
alliance dictates are not perceived nor felt as *now.* Yet the frame of
reference to which the present is referred for meaning is an *illusion*
of the past in which those elements which fit the purpose of the unholy
alliance are retained and all the rest let go. And what is thus let go
is all the truth the past could ever offer to the present as witnesses
for its reality, while what is kept but witnesses to the reality of
dreams.

^25^ It is still up to you to choose to be willing to join with truth or
illusion. But remember that to choose one is to let the other go. Which
one you choose, you will endow with beauty and reality because the
choice depends on which you value more. The spark of beauty or the veil
of ugliness, the real world or the world of guilt and fear, truth or
illusion, freedom or slavery-it is all the same. For you can never
choose except between God and the ego. Thought systems are but true or
false, and all their attributes come simply from what they are. Only the
Thoughts of God are true. And all that follows from them comes from what
they are and is as true as is the holy Source from which they came.

^26^ My holy brothers, I would enter into all your relationships and
step between you and your fantasies. Let *my* relationship to you be
real to you, and let me bring reality to your perception of your
brothers. They were not created to enable you to hurt yourselves through
them. They were created to create with you. This is the truth that I
would interpose between you and your goal of madness. Be not separate
from me, and let not the holy purpose of Atonement be lost to you in
dreams of vengeance. Relationships in which such dreams are cherished
have excluded me. Let me enter in the Name of God and bring you peace
that you may offer peace to me.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Perception and the Two Worlds**](#part0004.html#level-141) {#part0022_split_004.html#h1-141 .level1a}

^27^ God established His relationship with you to make you happy, and
nothing you do which does not share His purpose can be real. The purpose
God ascribed to anything is its only function. Because of His reason for
creating His relationship with you, the function of relationships became
forever "to make happy." *And nothing else*. To fulfill this function,
you relate to your creations as God to His. For nothing God created is
apart from happiness, and nothing God created but would extend happiness
as its Creator did. Whatever fulfills this function not cannot be real.

^28^ In this world it is impossible to create, yet it is possible to
make happy. We have said repeatedly that the Holy Spirit would not
deprive you of your special relationships but would transform them. And
by that all that is meant is that He will restore to them the function
given them by God. The function you have given them is clearly not to
make happy. But the holy relationship shares God's purpose, rather than
aiming to make a substitute for it. Every special relationship which you
have made is a substitute for God's Will and glorifies yours instead of
His because of the delusion that they are different.

^29^ You have made very real relationships even in this world which you
do not recognize simply because you have raised their substitutes to
such predominance that when truth calls to you, as it does constantly,
you answer with a substitute. Every special relationship which you have
ever undertaken has as its fundamental purpose the aim of occupying your
minds so completely that you will not hear the call of truth. In a sense
the special relationship was the ego's answer to the creation of the
Holy Spirit, Who was God's answer to the separation. For although the
ego did not understand what had been created, it was aware of threat.

^30^ The whole defense system which the ego evolved to protect the
separation from the Holy Spirit was in response to the gift with which
God blessed it and by His blessing enabled it to be healed. This
blessing holds within itself the truth about everything. And the truth
is that the Holy Spirit is in close relationship with you because in Him
is your relationship with God restored to you. The relationship with Him
has never been broken because the Holy Spirit has not been separate from
anyone since the separation. And through Him have all your holy
relationships been carefully preserved to serve God's purpose for you.

^31^ The ego is hyperalert to threat, and the part of your mind into
which the ego was accepted is very anxious to preserve its reason as it
sees it. It does not realize that it is totally insane. And you must
realize just what this means if you would be restored to sanity. The
insane protect their thought systems, but they do so insanely. And all
their defenses are as insane as what they are supposed to protect. The
separation has nothing in it, no part, no "reason," and no attribute
that is *not* insane. And its "protection" is part of it, as insane as
the whole. The special relationship, which is its chief defense, must
therefore be insane.

^32^ You have but little difficulty now in realizing that the thought
system which the special relationship protects is but a system of
delusions. You recognize, at least in general terms, that the ego is
insane. Yet the special relationship still seems to you somehow to be
"different." Yet we have looked at it far closer than at many other
aspects of the ego's thought system which you have been more willing to
let go. While this one remains, you will not let the others go. For this
one is not different. Retain this one, and you have retained the whole.

^33^ It is essential to realize that all defenses *do* what they would
*defend*. The underlying basis for their effectiveness is that they
offer what they defend. What they defend is placed in them for
safekeeping, and as they operate, they bring it to you. Every defense
operates by giving gifts, and the gift is always a miniature of the
thought system the defense protects, set in a golden frame. The frame is
very elaborate, all set with jewels and deeply carved and polished. Its
purpose is to be of value *in itself* and to divert your attention from
what it encloses. But the frame without the picture you cannot have.
Defenses operate to make you think you can.

^34^ The special relationship has the most imposing and deceptive frame
of all the defenses the ego uses. Its thought system is offered here,
surrounded by a frame so heavy and so elaborate that the picture is
almost obliterated by its imposing structure. Into the frame are woven
all sorts of fanciful and fragmented illusions of love, set with dreams
of sacrifice and self-aggrandizement and interlaced with gilded threads
of self-destruction. The glitter of blood shines like rubies, and the
tears are faceted like diamonds and gleam in the dim light in which the
offering is made.

^35^ Look at the *picture.* Do not let the frame distract you. This gift
is given you for your damnation, and if you take it, you will believe
that you *are* damned. You cannot have the frame without the picture.
What you value is the frame, for there you see no conflict. Yet the
frame is only the wrapping for the gift of conflict. The frame is *not*
the gift. Be not deceived by the most superficial aspects of this
thought system, for these aspects enclose the whole, complete in every
aspect. Death lies in this glittering gift. Let not your gaze dwell on
the hypnotic gleaming of the frame. Look at the *picture,* and realize
that *death* is offered you.

^36^ That is why the holy instant is so important in the defense of
truth. The truth itself *needs* no defense, but you *do* need defense
against your own acceptance of the gift of death. When you who are truth
accept an idea so dangerous to truth, you threaten truth with
destruction. And your defense must now be undertaken to keep truth
whole. The power of Heaven, the love of God, the tears of Christ, and
the joy of His eternal Spirit are marshaled to defend you from your own
attack. For you attack Them, being part of Them, and They must save you,
for They love Themselves.

^37^ The holy instant is a miniature of Heaven, sent you *from* Heaven.
It is a picture, too, set in a frame. Yet if you accept this gift, you
will not see the frame at all because the gift can only be accepted
through your willingness to focus *all* your attention on the *picture*.
The holy instant is a miniature of eternity. It is a picture of
timelessness, set in a frame of time. If you focus on the picture, you
will realize that it was only the frame that made you think it *was* a
picture. Without the frame, the picture is seen as what it represents.
For as the whole thought system of the ego lies in its gifts, so the
whole of Heaven lies in this instant, borrowed from eternity and set in
time for you.

^38^ Two gifts are offered you. Each is complete and cannot be partially
accepted. Each is a picture of all that you can have, seen very
differently. You cannot compare their value by comparing a picture to a
frame. It must be the pictures only that you compare, or the comparison
is wholly without meaning. Remember that it is the picture that is the
gift. And only on this basis are you really free to choose. Look at the
pictures. *Both* of them. One is a tiny picture, hard to see at all
beneath the heavy shadows of its enormous and disproportionate
enclosure. The other is lightly framed and hung in light, lovely to look
upon for what it *is*.

^39^ You who have tried so hard and are still trying to fit the better
picture into the wrong frame and so combine what cannot be combined,
accept this and be glad: these pictures are each framed perfectly for
what they represent. One is framed to be out of focus and not seen. The
other is framed for perfect clarity. The picture of darkness and of
death grows less convincing as you search it out amid its wrappings. As
each senseless stone which seems to shine in darkness from the frame is
exposed to light, it becomes dull and lifeless and ceases to distract
you from the picture. And finally you look upon the picture itself,
seeing at last that, unprotected by the frame, it has no meaning.

^40^ The other picture is lightly framed, for time cannot contain
eternity. There is no distraction here. The picture of Heaven and
eternity grows more convincing as you look at it. And now by real
comparison a transformation of both pictures can at last occur. And each
is given its rightful place, when both are seen in relation to each
other. The dark picture brought to light is not perceived as fearful,
but the fact that it is just a *picture* is brought home at last. And
what you see there, you will recognize as what it is-a picture of what
you thought was real and nothing more. For beyond this picture, you will
see nothing.

^41^ The picture of light, in clear cut and unmistakable contrast, is
transformed into what lies beyond the picture. As you look on this, you
realize that it is *not* a picture but a *reality*. This is no figured
representation of a thought system, but the Thought Itself. What *it*
represents is there. The frame fades gently, and God rises to your
remembrance, offering you the whole of creation in exchange for your
little picture, wholly without value and entirely deprived of meaning.

^42^ As God ascends into His rightful place and you to yours, you will
experience again the meaning of relationship and know it to be true. Let
us ascend in peace together to the Father by giving Him ascendance in
our minds. We will gain everything by giving Him the power and the glory
and keeping no illusions of where they are. They are in *us* through
*His* ascendance. What He has given is *His*. It shines in every part of
Him as in the whole. The whole reality of your relationship with Him
lies in our relationship to one another. The holy instant shines alike
on all relationships, for in it they *are* one. For here is only
healing, already complete and perfect. For here is God, and where He is,
only the perfect and complete can be.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Healed Relationship**](#part0004.html#level-142) {#part0022_split_005.html#h1-142 .level1a}

^43^ The holy relationship is the expression of the holy instant in
living in this world. Like everything about salvation, the holy instant
is a practical device, witnessed to by its results. The holy instant
never fails. The experience of it is always felt. Yet without
expression, it is not remembered. The holy relationship is a constant
reminder of the experience in which the relationship became what it is.
And as the unholy relationship is a continuing hymn of hate in praise of
its maker, so is the holy relationship a happy song of praise to the
Redeemer of relationships.

^44^ The holy relationship, a major step toward the perception of the
real world, is learned. It is the old unholy relationship transformed
and seen anew. The holy relationship is a phenomenal teaching
accomplishment. In all its aspects, as it begins, develops, and becomes
accomplished, it represents the reversal of the unholy relationship. Be
comforted in this-the only difficult phase is the beginning. For here,
the goal of the relationship is abruptly shifted to the exact opposite
of what it was. This is the first result of offering the relationship to
the Holy Spirit to use for His purposes.

^45^ This invitation is accepted immediately, and the Holy Spirit wastes
no time in introducing the practical results of asking Him to enter. At
once His goal replaces yours. This is accomplished very rapidly, but it
makes the relationship seem disturbed, disjunctive, and even quite
distressing. The reason is quite clear. For the relationship as it *is*
is out of line with its own goal, and clearly unsuited to the purpose
which has been accepted for it. In its unholy condition, *your* goal was
all that seemed to give it meaning. Now it seems to make no sense. Many
relationships have been broken off at this point, and the pursuit of the
old goal reestablished in another relationship. For once the unholy
relationship has accepted the goal of holiness, it can never again be
what it was.

^46^ The temptation of the ego becomes extremely intense with this shift
in goals. For the relationship has not as yet been changed sufficiently
to make its former goal completely without attraction, and its structure
is "threatened" by the recognition of its inappropriateness for meeting
its new purpose. The conflict between the goal and the structure of the
relationship is so apparent that they cannot coexist. Yet now the goal
will not be changed. Set firmly in the unholy relationship, there is no
course except to change the relationship to fit the goal. Until this
happy solution is seen and accepted as the only way out of the conflict,
the relationship seems to be severely strained.

^47^ It would not be kinder to shift the goal more slowly, for the
contrast would be obscured and the ego given time to reinterpret each
slow step according to its liking. Only a radical shift in purpose could
induce a complete change of mind about what the whole relationship is
*for*. As this change develops and is finally accomplished, it grows
increasingly beneficent and joyous. But at the beginning, the situation
is experienced as very precarious. A relationship undertaken by two
individuals for their unholy purposes suddenly has *holiness* for its
goal. As these two contemplate their relationship from the point of view
of this new purpose, they are inevitably appalled. Their perception of
the relationship may even become quite disorganized. And yet, the former
organization of their perception no longer serves the purpose they have
agreed to meet.

^48^ This is the time for *faith*. You let this goal be set for you.
That was an act of faith. Do not abandon faith, now that the rewards of
faith are being introduced. If you believed the Holy Spirit was there to
accept the relationship, why would you now not still believe that He is
there to purify what He has taken under His guidance? Have faith in each
other in what but seems to be a trying time. The goal *is* set. And your
relationship has sanity as its purpose. For now you find yourselves in
an insane relationship, recognized as such in the light of its goal.

^49^ Now the ego counsels thus-substitute for this another relationship
to which your former goal was quite appropriate. You can escape from
your distress only by getting rid of each other. You need not part
entirely if you choose not to do so. But you must exclude major areas of
fantasy from each other to save your sanity. Hear not this now! Have
faith in Him Who answered you. He heard. Has He not been very explicit
in His answer? You are not now wholly insane. Can you deny that He has
given you a most explicit statement? Now He asks for faith a little
longer, even in bewilderment. For this will go, and you will see the
justification for your faith emerge to bring you shining conviction.
Abandon Him not now, nor each other. This relationship has been reborn
as holy.

^50^ Accept with gladness what you do not understand, and let it be
explained to you as you perceive its purpose work in it to make it holy.
You will find many opportunities to blame each other for the "failure"
of your relationship, for it will seem at times to have no purpose. A
sense of aimlessness will come to haunt you and to remind you of all the
ways you once sought for satisfaction and thought you found it. Forget
not now the misery you really found, and do not now breathe life into
your failing egos. For your relationship has not been disrupted. It has
been *saved*.

^51^ You are very new in the ways of salvation and think you have lost
your way. *Your* way *is* lost, but think not this is loss. In your
newness, remember that you have started again *together*. And take each
other's hand to walk together along a road far more familiar than you
now believe. Is it not certain that you will remember a goal unchanged
throughout eternity? For you have chosen but the goal of God from which
your true intent was never absent.

^52^ Throughout the Sonship is the song of freedom heard in joyous echo
of your choice. You have joined with many in the holy instant, and they
have joined with you. Think not your choice will leave you comfortless,
for God Himself has blessed your holy relationship. Join in His
blessing, and withhold not yours upon it. For all it needs now *is* your
blessing that you may see that in it rests salvation. Condemn salvation
not, for it has come to you. And welcome it together, for it has come to
join you together in a relationship in which all the Sonship is together
blessed.

^53^ You undertook together to invite the Holy Spirit into your
relationship. He could not have entered otherwise. Although you may have
made many mistakes since then, you have also made enormous efforts to
help Him do His work. And He has not been lacking in appreciation for
all you have done for Him. Nor does He see the mistakes at all. Have you
been similarly grateful to each other? Have you consistently appreciated
the good efforts and overlooked mistakes? Or has your appreciation
flickered and grown dim in what seemed to be the light of the mistakes?
You are now entering upon a campaign to blame each other for the
discomfort of the situation in which you find yourselves. And by this
lack of thanks and gratitude, you make yourselves unable to express the
holy instant, and thus you lose sight of it.

^54^ The experience of an instant, however compelling it may be, is
easily forgotten if you allow time to close over it. It must be kept
shining and gracious in your awareness of time but not concealed within
it. The instant remains. But where are you? To give thanks to each other
is to appreciate the holy instant and thus enable its results to be
accepted and shared. To attack each other is not to lose the instant but
to make it powerless in its effects. You *have* received the holy
instant, but you have established a condition in which you cannot use
it. As a result, you do not realize that it is with you still. And by
cutting yourself off from its expression, you have denied yourself its
benefit. You reinforce this every time you attack each other, for the
attack must blind you to yourself. And it is impossible to deny yourself
and recognize what has been given and received by you.

^55^ You stand together in the holy presence of truth itself. Here is
the goal, together with you. Think you not the goal itself will gladly
arrange the means for its accomplishment? It is just this same
discrepancy between the purpose that has been accepted and the means as
they stand now which seems to make you suffer, but which makes Heaven
glad. If Heaven were outside you, you could not share in its gladness.
Yet because it is within, the gladness, too, is yours. You *are* joined
in purpose, but remain still separate and divided on the means.

^56^ Yet the goal is fixed, firm, and unalterable, and the means will
surely fall in place because the goal is sure. And you will share the
gladness of the Sonship that it is so. As you begin to recognize and
accept the gifts you have so freely given to each other, you will also
accept the effects of the holy instant and use them to correct all your
mistakes and free you from their results. And learning this, you will
have also learned how to release all the Sonship and offer it in
gladness and thanksgiving to Him Who gave you your release, and Who
would extend it through you.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Practical Forgiveness**](#part0004.html#level-143) {#part0022_split_006.html#h1-143 .level1a}

^57^ The practical application of the Holy Spirit's purpose is extremely
simple, but it is unequivocal. In fact in order to be simple, it *must*
be unequivocal. The simple is merely what is easily understood, and for
this it is apparent that it must be clear. The setting of the Holy
Spirit's goal is general. Now He will work with you to make it
specific\[, for application *is* specific\]. There are certain very
specific guidelines He provides for any situation, but remember that you
do not yet realize their universal application. Therefore it is
essential at this point to use them in each situation separately, until
you can more safely look beyond each situation in an understanding far
broader than you now possess.

^58^ In any situation in which you are uncertain, the first thing to
consider, very simply, is, "What do I want to come of this? What is it
*for*?" The clarification of the goal belongs at the beginning, for it
is this which will determine the outcome. In the ego's procedure, this
is reversed. The situation becomes the determiner of the outcome, which
can be anything. The reason for this disorganized approach is evident.
The ego does not know what it wants to come of it. It is aware of what
it does not want, but only that. It has no positive goal at all.

^59^ Without a clear cut positive goal, set at the outset, the situation
just seems to happen and makes no sense until it has already happened.
Then you look back at it and try to piece together what it must have
meant. And you will be wrong. Not only is your judgment in the past, but
you have no idea what should happen. No goal was set with which to bring
the means in line. And now the only judgment left to make is whether or
not the ego likes it-is it acceptable, or does it call for vengeance?
The absence of a criterion for outcome set in advance makes
understanding doubtful and evaluation impossible.

^60^ The value of deciding in advance what you want to happen is simply
that you will perceive the situation as a means to *make* it happen. You
will therefore make every effort to overlook what interferes with the
accomplishment of your objective and concentrate on everything which
helps you meet it. It is quite noticeable that this approach has brought
you closer to the Holy Spirit's sorting out of truth and falsity. The
true becomes what can be used to meet the goal. The false becomes the
useless from this point of view. The situation now has meaning, but only
because the *goal* has made it meaningful.

^61^ The goal of truth has further practical advantages. If the
situation is used for truth and sanity, its outcome must be peace. And
this is quite apart from what the outcome *is*. If peace is the
condition of truth and sanity and cannot be without them, where peace is
they must be. Truth comes of itself. If you experience peace, it is
because the truth has come to you, and you will see the outcome truly,
for deception cannot prevail against you. And you will recognize the
outcome *because* you are at peace. Here again, you see the opposite of
the ego's way of looking, for the ego believes the situation brings the
experience. The Holy Spirit knows that the situation is as the goal
determines it and is experienced according to the goal.

^62^ The goal of truth requires faith. Faith is implicit in the
acceptance of the Holy Spirit's purpose, and this faith is
all-inclusive. Where the goal of truth is set, there faith must be. The
Holy Spirit sees the situation as a *whole*. The goal establishes the
fact that everyone involved in it will play his part in its
accomplishment. This is inevitable. No one will fail in anything. This
seems to ask for faith beyond you and beyond what you can give. Yet this
is so only from the viewpoint of the ego, for the ego believes in
"solving" conflict through fragmentation and does not perceive the
situation as a whole. Therefore, it seeks to split off segments of the
situation and deal with them separately, for it has faith in separation
and not in wholeness.

^63^ Confronted with any aspect of the situation which seems to be
difficult, the ego will attempt to take this aspect elsewhere and
resolve it there. And it will seem to be successful, except that this
attempt conflicts with unity and must obscure the goal of truth. And
peace will not be experienced except in fantasy. Truth has not come
because faith has been denied, being withheld from where it rightfully
belonged. Thus do you lose the understanding of the situation the goal
of truth would bring. For fantasy solutions bring but the illusion of
experience, and the illusion of peace is not the condition in which the
truth can enter.

^64^ The substitutes for aspects of the situation are the witnesses to
your lack of faith. They demonstrate that you did not believe that the
situation and the problem were in the same place. The problem was the
lack of faith, and it is this you demonstrate when you remove it from
its source and place it elsewhere. As a result, you do not see the
problem. Had you not lacked the faith it could be solved, the problem
would be gone. And the situation would have been meaningful to you
because the interference in the way of understanding would have been
removed. To remove the problem elsewhere is to *keep* it. For you remove
yourself from it and make it unsolvable.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Need for Faith**](#part0004.html#level-144) {#part0022_split_007.html#h1-144 .level1a}

^65^ There is no problem in any situation that faith will not solve.
There is no shift in any aspect of the problem but will make solution
impossible. For if you shift part of the problem elsewhere, the meaning
of the problem must be lost, and the solution to the problem is inherent
in its meaning. Is it not possible that all your problems have been
solved, but you have removed yourself from the solution? Yet faith must
be where something has been done and where you see it done. A situation
is a relationship, being the joining of thoughts. If problems are
perceived, it is because the thoughts are judged to be in conflict. But
if the goal is truth, this is impossible. Some idea of bodies must have
entered, for minds cannot attack.

^66^ The thought of bodies is the sign of faithlessness, for bodies
cannot solve anything. And it is their intrusion on the relationship, an
error in your thoughts about the situation, which then becomes the
justification for your lack of faith. You will make this error, but be
not at all concerned with that. The error does not matter. Faithlessness
brought to faith will never interfere with truth. But faithlessness used
against truth will always destroy faith. If you lack faith, ask that it
be restored where it was lost and seek not to have it made up to you
elsewhere as if you had been unjustly deprived of it.

^67^ Only what *you* have not given can be lacking in any situation. But
remember this: the goal of holiness was set for your relationship and
not by you. You did not set it because holiness cannot be seen except
through faith, and your relationship was not holy because your faith in
one another was so limited and little. Your faith must grow to meet the
goal that has been set. The goal's reality will call this forth, for you
will see that peace and faith will not come separately. What situation
can you be in without faith and remain faithful to each other?

^68^ Every situation in which you find yourself is but a means to meet
the purpose set for your relationship. See it as something else, and you
*are* faithless. Use not your faithlessness. Let it enter and look upon
it calmly, but do not use it. Faithlessness is the servant of illusion
and wholly faithful to its master. Use it and it will carry you straight
to illusions. Be tempted not by what it offers you. It interferes not
with the goal, but with the value of the goal to you. Accept not the
illusion of peace it offers, but look upon its offering and recognize it
is illusion.

^69^ The goal of illusion is as closely tied to faithlessness as faith
to truth. If you lack faith in anyone to fulfill, and perfectly, his
part in any situation dedicated in advance to truth, your dedication is
divided. And so you have been faithless to each other and used your
faithlessness against each other. No relationship is holy unless its
holiness goes with it everywhere. As holiness and faith go hand in hand,
so must its faith go everywhere with it. The goal's reality will call
forth and accomplish every miracle needed for its fulfillment. Nothing
too small or too enormous, too weak or too compelling, but will be
gently turned to its use and purpose. The universe will serve it gladly,
as it serves the universe. But do not interfere.

^70^ The power set in you in whom the Holy Spirit's goal has been
established is so far beyond your little conception of the infinite that
you have no idea how great the strength that goes with you. And you can
use *this* in perfect safety. Yet for all its might, so great it reaches
past the stars and to the universe that lies beyond them, your little
faithlessness can make it useless if you would use the faithlessness
instead.

^71^ Yet think on this, and learn the cause of faithlessness: You think
you hold against the other what he has done to you. But what you really
blame him for is what *you* did to *him*. It is not *his* past but
*yours* you hold against him. And you lack faith in him because of what
*you* were. Yet you are as innocent of what you were as he is. What
never was is causeless and is not there to interfere with truth. There
is no cause for faithlessness, but there *is* a Cause for faith. That
Cause has entered any situation which shares Its purpose. The light of
truth shines from the center of the situation and touches everyone to
whom the situation's purpose calls. It calls to everyone. There is no
situation which does not involve your whole relationship in every aspect
and complete in every part. You can leave nothing of yourself outside it
and keep the situation holy. For it shares the purpose of your whole
relationship and derives its meaning from it.

^72^ Enter each situation with the faith that you give to each other, or
you are faithless to your own relationship. Your faith will call the
others to share your purpose, as this same purpose called forth the
faith in you. And you will see the means you once employed to lead you
to illusions transformed to means for truth. \[Truth calls for faith,
and faith makes room *for truth*.\] When the Holy Spirit changed the
purpose of your relationship by exchanging yours for His, the goal He
placed there was extended to every situation in which you enter or will
ever enter. And every situation was thus made free of the past, which
would have made it purposeless.

^73^ You call for faith because of Him Who walks with you in every
situation. You are no longer wholly insane, nor no longer alone. For
loneliness in God must be a dream. You whose relationship shares the
Holy Spirit's goal are set apart from loneliness because the truth has
come. Its call for faith is strong. Use not your faithlessness against
it, for it calls you to salvation and to peace.
:::

[]{#part0022_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Conditions of Forgiveness**](#part0004.html#level-145) {#part0022_split_008.html#h1-145 .level1a}

^74^ The holy instant is nothing more than a special case or an extreme
example of what every situation is meant to be. The meaning which the
Holy Spirit's purpose has given it is also given to every situation. It
calls forth just the same suspension of faithlessness, withheld and left
unused, that faith might answer to the call of truth. The holy instant
is the shining example, the clear and unequivocal demonstration of the
meaning of every relationship and every situation, seen as a whole.
Faith has accepted every aspect of the situation, and faithlessness has
not forced any exclusion on it. It is a situation of perfect peace
simply because you have let it be what it is.

^75^ This simple courtesy is all the Holy Spirit asks of you. Let truth
be what it is. Do not intrude upon it, do not attack it, do not
interrupt its coming. Let it encompass every situation and bring you
peace. Not even faith is asked of you, for truth asks nothing. Let it
enter, and it will call forth and secure for you the faith you need for
peace. But rise you not against it, for against your opposition it
cannot come.

^76^ Would you not want to make a holy instant of every situation? For
such is the gift of faith, freely given wherever faithlessness is laid
aside unused. And then the power of the Holy Spirit's purpose is free to
use instead. This power instantly transforms all situations into one
sure and continuous means for establishing His purpose and demonstrating
its reality. What has been demonstrated has called for faith and has
been given it. Now it becomes a fact from which faith can no longer be
withheld. The strain of refusing faith to truth is enormous and far
greater than you realize. But to answer truth with faith entails no
strain at all.

^77^ To you who have acknowledged the call of your Redeemer, the strain
of not responding to His call seems to be greater than before. This is
not so. Before, the strain was there but you attributed it to something
else, believing that the "something else" produced it. This was never
true. For what the "something else" produced was sorrow and depression,
sickness and pain, darkness and dim imaginings of terror, cold fantasies
of fear and fiery dreams of hell. And it was nothing but the intolerable
strain of refusing to give faith to truth and see its evident reality.

^78^ Such was the crucifixion of the Son of God. His faithlessness did
this to him. Think carefully before you let yourself use faithlessness
against him. For he is risen, and you have accepted the cause of his
awakening as yours. You have assumed your part in his redemption, and
you are now fully responsible to him. Fail him not now, for it has been
given you to realize what your lack of faith in him must mean to *you*.
His salvation *is* your only purpose. See only this in every situation,
and it will be a means for bringing only this.

^79^ When you accepted truth as the goal for your relationship, you
became givers of peace as surely as your Father gave peace to you. For
the goal of peace cannot be accepted apart from its conditions, and you
had faith in it, for no one accepts what he does not believe is real.
Your purpose has not changed and will not change, for you accepted what
can never change. And nothing that it needs to be forever changeless can
you now withhold from it. Your release is certain. Give as you have
received. And demonstrate that you have risen far beyond any situation
that could hold you back and keep you separate from Him Whose call you
answered.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Eighteen**](#part0004.html#chap-18) {#part0023_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Dream and the Reality**](#part0004.html#chap-18) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-146) {#part0023_split_000.html#h1-146 .level1a1}

^18:1^ To substitute is to accept instead. If you would but consider
exactly what this entails, you would perceive at once how much at
variance this is with the goal the Holy Spirit has given you and would
accomplish for you. To substitute is to choose between, renouncing one
in favor of the other. For this special purpose, one is judged more
valuable and the other is replaced by him. The relationship in which the
substitution occurred is thus fragmented and its purpose split
accordingly. To fragment is to exclude, and substitution is the
strongest defense the ego has for separation.

^2^ The Holy Spirit never uses substitutes. Where the ego perceives one
person as a replacement for another, the Holy Spirit sees them joined
and indivisible. He does not judge between them, knowing they are one.
Being united, they are one because they are the *same*. Substitution is
clearly a process in which they are perceived as different. One would
unite; the other separate. Nothing can come between what God has joined
and what the Holy Spirit sees as one. But everything *seems* to come
between the fragmented relationships the ego sponsors to destroy.

^3^ The one emotion in which substitution is impossible is love. Fear
involves substitution by definition, for it is love's replacement. Fear
is both a fragmented and a fragmenting emotion. It seems to take many
forms, and each seems to require a different form of acting out for
satisfaction. While this appears to introduce quite variable behavior, a
far more serious effect lies in the fragmented perception from which the
behavior stems. No one is seen complete. The body is emphasized, with
special emphasis on certain parts, and used as the standard for
comparison for either acceptance or rejection of suitability for acting
out a special form of fear.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Substitution as a Defense**](#part0004.html#level-147) {#part0023_split_001.html#h1-147 .level1a}

^4^ You who believe that God is fear made but one substitution. It has
taken many forms because it was the substitution of illusion for truth,
of fragmentation for wholeness. It has become so splintered and
subdivided and divided again, over and over, that it is now almost
impossible to perceive it once was one and still is what it was. That
one error, which brought truth to illusion, infinity to time, and life
to death, was all you ever made. Your whole world rests upon it.
Everything you see reflects it, and every special relationship which you
have ever made is part of it.

^5^ You have expressed surprise at hearing how very different is reality
from what you see. You do not realize the magnitude of that one error.
It was so vast and so completely incredible that from it a world of
total unreality *had* to emerge. What else could come of it? Its
fragmented aspects are fearful enough, as you begin to look at them. But
nothing you have seen begins to show you the enormity of the original
error, which seemed to cast you out of Heaven, to shatter knowledge into
meaningless bits of disunited perceptions, and to force you to further
substitutions.

^6^ That was the first projection of error outward. The world arose to
hide it and became the screen on which it was projected and drawn
between you and the truth. For truth extends inward, where the idea of
loss is meaningless and only increase is conceivable. Do you really
think it strange that a world in which everything is backwards and
upside-down arose from this? \[*It was inevitable*.\] For truth brought
to this could only remain within in quiet and take no part in all the
mad projection by which this world was made. Call it not sin but
madness, for such it was, and so it still remains. Invest it not with
guilt, for guilt implies it was accomplished in reality. And above all,
be not *afraid* of it. When you seem to see some twisted form of the
original error rise to frighten you, say only, "God is not fear, but
love," and it will disappear.

^7^ The truth will *save* you. It has not left you to go out into the
mad world and so depart from you. Inward is sanity; insanity is outside
you. You but believe it is the other way; that truth is outside and
error and guilt within. Your little senseless substitutions, touched
with insanity and swirling lightly off on a mad course like feathers
dancing insanely in the wind, have no substance. They fuse and merge and
separate in shifting and totally meaningless patterns which need not be
judged at all. To judge them individually is pointless. Their tiny
differences in form are no real differences at all. None of them
matters. That they have in common and nothing else. Yet what else is
necessary to make them all the same?

^8^ Let them all go, dancing in the wind, dipping and turning till they
disappear from sight, far, far outside you. And turn you to the stately
calm within, where in holy stillness dwells the living God you never
left and Who never left you. The Holy Spirit takes you gently by the
hand and retraces with you your mad journey outside yourself, leading
you gently back to the truth and safety within. He brings all your
insane projections and your wild substitutions which you have placed
outside you to the truth. Thus He reverses the course of insanity and
restores you to reason.

^9^ In your relationship, where He has taken charge of everything at
your request, He has set the course inward to the truth you share. In
the mad world outside you, nothing can be shared but only substituted,
and sharing and substituting have nothing in common in reality. Within
yourselves you love each other with a perfect love. Here is holy ground
in which no substitution can enter and where only the truth about each
other can abide. Here you are joined in God, as much together as you are
with Him. The original error has not entered here, nor ever will. Here
is the radiant truth to which the Holy Spirit has committed your
relationship. Let Him bring it here, where *you* would have it be. Give
Him but a little faith in each other, to help Him show you that no
substitute you made for Heaven can keep you from it. In you there *is*
no separation, and no substitute can keep you from each other. Your
reality was God's creation and has no substitute.

^10^ You are so firmly joined in truth that only God is there. And He
would never accept something else instead of you. He loves you both,
equally and as one. And as He loves you, so you *are*. You are not
joined together in illusions but in the Thought so holy and so perfect
that illusions cannot remain to darken the holy place in which you stand
together. God is with you, my brothers. Let us join in Him in peace and
gratitude and accept His gift as our most holy and perfect reality,
which we share in Him.

^11^ Heaven is restored to all the Sonship through your relationship,
for in it lies the Sonship, whole and beautiful, safe in your love.
Heaven has entered quietly, for all illusions have been gently brought
unto the truth in you and love has shined upon you, blessing your
relationship with truth. God and His whole creation have entered it
together. How lovely and how holy is your relationship, with the truth
shining upon it! Heaven beholds it and rejoices that you have let it
come to you. \[And God Himself is glad that your relationship is as it
was created.\] The universe within you stands with you, together. And
Heaven looks with love on what is joined in it, along with its Creator.

^12^ Whom God has called should hear no substitutes. Their call is but
an echo of the original error which shattered Heaven. And what became of
peace in those who heard? Return with me to Heaven, walking together out
of this world and through another to the loveliness and joy the other
holds within it. Would you still further weaken and break apart what is
already broken and hopeless? Is it here that you would look for
happiness? Or would you not prefer to heal what has been broken and join
in making whole what has been ravaged by separation and disease?

^13^ You have been called together to the most holy function that this
world contains. It is the only one which has no limits and reaches out
to every broken fragment of the Sonship with healing and uniting
comfort. This is offered you in your holy relationship. Accept it here,
and you will give as you have accepted. The peace of God is given you
with the glowing purpose in which you join. The holy light that brought
you together must extend, as you accepted it.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Basis of the Dream**](#part0004.html#level-148) {#part0023_split_002.html#h1-148 .level1a}

^14^ Does not a world that seems quite real arise in dreams? Yet think
what this world is. It is clearly not the world you saw before you
slept. Rather, it is a distortion of the world, planned solely around
what you would have preferred. Here, you are "free" to make over
whatever seemed to attack you and change it into a tribute to your ego,
which was outraged by the "attack." This would not *be* your wish unless
you saw yourself as one with the ego, which always looks upon itself and
therefore on you as under attack and highly vulnerable to it.

^15^ Dreams are chaotic because they are governed by your conflicting
wishes, and therefore they have no concern with what is true. They are
the best example you could have of how perception can be utilized to
substitute illusions for truth. You do not take them seriously on
awaking because the fact that reality is so outrageously violated in
them becomes apparent. Yet they are a way of looking at the world and
changing it to suit the ego better. They provide striking examples both
of the ego's inability to tolerate reality and your willingness to
change reality on its behalf.

^16^ You do not find the differences between what you see in sleep and
on awaking disturbing. You recognize that what you see on waking is
blotted out in dreams. Yet on awakening, you do not expect it to be
gone. In dreams *you* arrange everything. People become what you would
have them be, and what they do you order. No limit on substitution is
laid upon you. For a time, it seems as if the world were given you, to
make it what you will. You do not realize that you are attacking it,
trying to triumph over it and make it serve you.

^17^ Dreams are perceptual temper tantrums in which you literally
scream, "I want it *thus*!" And thus it seems to be. And yet the dream
cannot escape its origin. Anger and fear pervade it, and in an instant,
the illusion of satisfaction is invaded by the illusion of terror. For
the dream of your ability to control reality by substituting a world
which you prefer *is* terrifying. Your attempts to blot out reality are
very fearful, but this you are not willing to accept. And so you
substitute the fantasy that *reality* is fearful, not what you would
*do* to it. And thus is guilt made real.

^18^ Dreams show you that you have the power to make a world as you
would have it be, and that because you want it, you see it. And while
you see it, you do not doubt that it is real. Yet here is a world,
clearly within your mind, that seems to be *outside*. You do not respond
to it as though you made it, nor do you realize that the emotions which
the dream produces must come from you. It is the figures in the dream
and what they do that seem to make the dream. You do not realize that
you are making them act out for you, for if you did, the guilt would not
be theirs, and the illusion of satisfaction would be gone. In dreams
these features are not obscure. You seem to waken, and the dream is
gone. Yet what you fail to recognize is that what caused the dream has
not gone with it.

^19^ Your wish to make another world that is not real *remains* with
you. And what you seem to wake to is but another form of this same world
you see in dreams. All your time is spent in dreaming. Your sleeping and
your waking dreams have different forms, and that is all. Their
*content* is the same. They are your protest against reality and your
fixed and insane idea that you can change it. In your waking dreams, the
special relationship \[has a special place. It is the means by which you
try to make your *sleeping* dreams *come true*. From this you do not
awaken. The special relationship\] is your determination to keep your
hold on unreality and to prevent yourself from waking. And while you see
more value in sleeping than in waking, you will not let go of it.

^20^ The Holy Spirit, ever practical in His wisdom, accepts your dreams
and uses them as means for waking. You would have used them to remain
asleep. We once said that the first change, before dreams disappear, is
that your dreams of fear are changed to happy dreams. That is what the
Holy Spirit does in your special relationship. He does not destroy it
nor snatch it away from you. \[But He does use it differently, as a help
to make *His* purpose *real* to you.\] Your special relationship will
remain, not as a source of pain and guilt, but as a source of joy and
freedom. It will not be for you alone, for therein lay its misery. As
its unholiness kept it a thing apart, its holiness will become an
offering to everyone.

^21^ Your special relationship will be a means for undoing guilt in
everyone blessed through your holy relationship. It will be a happy
dream, and one which you will share with all who come within your sight.
Through it, the blessing which the Holy Spirit has laid upon it will be
extended. Think not that He has forgotten anyone in the purpose He has
given you. And think not that He has forgotten you to whom He gave the
gift. He uses everyone who calls on Him as means for the salvation of
everyone. And He will waken everyone through you who offered your
relationship to Him. If you but recognized His gratitude! Or mine
through His! For we are joined as in one purpose, being of One Mind with
Him.

^22^ Let not the dream take hold to close your eyes. It is not strange
that dreams can make a world that is unreal. The *wish* to make it is
incredible. Your relationship has become one in which the wish has been
removed because its purpose has been changed from one of dreams to one
of truth. You are not sure of this because you think it may be *this*
that is the dream. You are so used to choosing between dreams you do not
see that you have made, at last, the choice between the truth and *all*
illusions.

^23^ Yet Heaven is sure. This is no dream. Its coming means that you
have chosen truth, and it has come because you have been willing to let
your special relationship meet its conditions. In your relationship, the
Holy Spirit has gently laid the real world-the world of happy dreams
from which awaking is so easy and so natural. For as your sleeping and
your waking dreams represent the same wishes in your mind, so do the
real world and the truth of Heaven join in the Will of God. The dream of
waking is easily transferred to its reality. For this dream comes from
your will joined with the Will of God. And what this Will would have
accomplished has never *not* been done.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Light in the Dream**](#part0004.html#level-149) {#part0023_split_003.html#h1-149 .level1a}

^24^ You who have spent your lives in bringing truth to illusion,
reality to fantasy, have walked the way of dreams. For you have gone
from waking to sleeping and on and on to a yet deeper sleep. Each dream
has led to other dreams, and every fantasy which seemed to bring a light
into the darkness but made the darkness deeper. Your goal was darkness
in which no ray of light could enter. And you sought a blackness so
complete that you could hide from truth forever in complete insanity.
What you forgot was simply that God cannot destroy Himself. The light is
*in* you. Darkness can cover it but *cannot* put it out.

^25^ As the light comes nearer, you will rush to darkness, shrinking
from the truth, sometimes retreating to the lesser forms of fear and
sometimes to stark terror. But you will advance because your goal *is*
the advance from fear to truth. You *know* this. The goal which you
accepted *is* the goal of knowledge, for which you signified your
willingness. Fear seems to live in darkness, and when you are afraid,
you have stepped back. Let us then join quickly in an instant of light,
and it will be enough to remind you that your goal *is* light. Truth has
rushed to meet you since you called upon it.

^26^ If you knew Who walks beside you on this way which you have chosen,
fear would be impossible. You do not know because the journey into
darkness has been long and cruel, and you have gone deep into it. A
little flicker of your eyelids, closed so long, has not yet been
sufficient to give you confidence in yourselves, so long despised. You
go toward love, still hating it and terribly afraid of its judgment upon
you. And you do not realize that you are not afraid of love, but only of
what you have made of it. You are advancing to love's meaning and away
from all illusions in which you have surrounded it. When you retreat to
the illusion, your fear increases, for there is little doubt that what
you think it means *is* fearful. Yet what is that to us who travel
surely and very swiftly away from fear?

^27^ You who hold each other's hand also hold mine, for when you joined
each other you were not alone. Do you believe that I would leave you in
the darkness you agreed to leave with me? In your relationship is this
world's light. And fear must disappear before you now. Be tempted not to
snatch away the gift of faith you offered to each other. You will
succeed only in frightening yourselves. The gift is given forever, for
God Himself received it. You cannot take it back. You have accepted God.
The holiness of your relationship is established in Heaven. You do not
understand what you accepted, but remember that your understanding is
not necessary. All that was necessary was merely the *wish* to
understand. That wish was the desire to be holy. The will of God is
granted you. For you desire the only thing you ever had or ever were.

^28^ Each instant that we spend together will teach you that this goal
is possible and will strengthen your desire to reach it. And in your
desire lies its accomplishment. Your desire is now in complete accord
with all the power of the Holy Spirit's Will. No little, faltering
footsteps that you may take can separate your desire from His Will and
from His strength. I hold your hand as surely as you agreed to take each
other's. You will not separate, for I stand with you and walk with you
in your advance to truth. And where we go, we carry God with us.

^29^ In your relationship, you have joined with me in bringing Heaven to
the Son of God, who hid in darkness. You have been willing to bring the
darkness to light, and this willingness has given strength to everyone
who would remain in darkness. Those who would see *will* see. And they
will join with me in carrying their light into the darkness when the
darkness in them is offered to the light and is removed forever. My need
for you, joined with me in the holy light of your relationship, is your
need for salvation. Would I not give you what you gave to me? For when
you joined each other, you answered me.

^30^ You who are now the bringers of salvation have the function of
bringing light to darkness. The darkness in you *has* been brought to
light. Carry it back to darkness from the holy instant to which you
brought it. We are made whole in our desire to make whole. Let not time
worry you, for all the fear that you experience is really past. Time has
been readjusted to help us do together what your separate pasts would
hinder. You have gone past fear, for no two minds can join in the desire
for love without love's joining them.

^31^ Not one light in Heaven but goes with you. Not one ray that shines
forever in the Mind of God but shines on you. Heaven is joined with you
in your advance to Heaven. When such great light has joined with you to
give the little spark of your desire the power of God Himself, can you
remain in darkness? You are coming home together after a long and
meaningless journey which you undertook apart and which led nowhere. You
have found each other and will light each other's way. And from this
light will the Great Rays extend back into darkness and forward unto God
to shine away the past and so make room for His eternal Presence, in
which everything is radiant in the light.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Little Willingness**](#part0004.html#level-150) {#part0023_split_004.html#h1-150 .level1a}

^32^ The holy instant is the result of your determination to be holy. It
is the *answer*. The desire and the willingness to let it come precedes
its coming. You prepare your minds for it only to the extent of
recognizing that you want it above all else. It is not necessary that
you do more; indeed, it is necessary that you realize that you cannot do
more. Do not attempt to give the Holy Spirit what He does not ask, or
you will add the ego unto Him and confuse the two. He asks but little.
It is *He* who adds the greatness and the might. He joins with you to
make the holy instant far greater than you can understand. It is your
realization that you need do so little that enables Him to give so much.

^33^ Trust not your good intentions. They are not enough. But trust
implicitly your willingness, whatever else may enter. Concentrate only
on this and be not disturbed that shadows surround it. That is why you
came. If you could come without them, you would not need the holy
instant. Come to it not in arrogance, assuming that you must achieve the
state its coming brings with it. The miracle of the holy instant lies in
your willingness to let it be what it is. And in your willingness for
this lies also your acceptance of yourself as you were meant to be.

^34^ Humility will never ask that you remain content with littleness.
But it *does* require that you be *not* content with less than
greatness, which comes not of you. Your difficulty with the holy instant
arises from your fixed conviction that you are not worthy of it. And
what is this but the determination to be as you would make yourself? God
did not create His dwelling-place unworthy of Him. And if you believe He
cannot enter where He wills to be, you must be interfering with His
Will. You do not need the strength of willingness to come from *you*,
but only from *His* Will.

^35^ The holy instant does not come from your little willingness alone.
It is always the result of your small willingness combined with the
unlimited power of God's Will. You have been wrong in thinking that it
is needful to prepare yourself for Him. It is impossible to make
arrogant preparations for holiness and not believe that it is up to you
to establish the conditions for peace. God has established them. They do
not wait upon your willingness for what they are. Your willingness is
needed only to make it possible to *teach* you what they are. If you
maintain you are unworthy of learning this, you are interfering with the
lesson by believing that you make the *learner* different. You did not
make the learner, nor can you make him different. Would you first make a
miracle yourself and then expect one to be made *for* you?

^36^ You merely ask the question. The answer is given. Seek not to
answer it, but merely receive the answer as it is given. In preparing
for the holy instant, do not attempt to make yourself holy to be ready
to receive it. That is but to confuse your role with God's. Atonement
cannot come to those who think that they must first atone, but only to
those who offer it nothing more than simple willingness to make way for
it. Purification is of God alone and therefore for you. Rather than seek
to prepare yourself for Him, try to think thus:

^37^ I who am host to God am worthy of Him.\
He Who established His dwelling-place in me created it\
as He would have it be.\
It is not needful that I make it ready for Him,\
But only that I do not interfere with His plan to restore to\
me my own awareness of my readiness, which is eternal.\
I need add nothing to His plan.\
But to receive it, I must be willing not to substitute\
my own in place of it.

^38^ And that is all. Add more and you will merely take away the little
that is asked. Remember you made guilt and that your plan for the escape
from guilt has been to bring Atonement *to* it and make salvation
fearful. And it is only fear that you will add if you prepare yourself
for love. The preparation for the holy instant belongs to Him Who gives
it. Release yourselves to Him Whose function is release. Do not assume
His function for Him. Give Him but what He asks, that you may learn how
little is your part and how great is His.

^39^ It is this that makes the holy instant so easy and so natural. You
make it difficult because you insist there must be more that you need
do. \[You find it difficult to *accept* the idea that you need give so
*little* to receive so much.\] And it is very hard for you to realize
that it is not personally insulting that your contribution and the Holy
Spirit's are so extremely disproportionate. You are still convinced your
understanding is a powerful contribution to the truth and makes it what
it is. Yet we have emphasized that you need understand nothing.
Salvation is easy just *because* it asks nothing that you cannot give
*right now*.

^40^ Forget not that it has been your decision to make everything that
is natural and easy for you impossible. What you believe to be
impossible will be if God so wills it, but you will remain quite unaware
of it. If you believe the holy instant is difficult for you, it is
because you have become the arbiter of what is possible and remain
unwilling to give place to One Who knows. The whole belief in orders of
difficulty in miracles is centered on this. Everything God wills is not
only possible but has already happened. And that is why the past has
gone. It *never* happened in reality. Only in your minds, which thought
it did, is its undoing needful.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Happy Dream**](#part0004.html#level-151) {#part0023_split_005.html#h1-151 .level1a}

^41^ Prepare you *now* for the undoing of what never was. If you already
understood the difference between truth and illusion, the Atonement
would have no meaning. The holy instant, your holy relationship, the
Holy Spirit's teaching, and all the means by which salvation is
accomplished would have no purpose. For they are all but aspects of the
plan to change your dreams of fear to happy dreams from which you waken
easily to knowledge. Put yourself not in charge of this, for you cannot
distinguish between advance and retreat. Some of your greatest advances
you have judged as failures, and some of your deepest retreats you have
evaluated as success.

^42^ Never approach the holy instant after you have tried to remove all
fear and hatred from your mind. That is *its* function. Never attempt to
overlook your guilt before you ask the Holy Spirit's help. That is *His*
function. Your part is only to offer Him a little willingness to *let*
Him remove all fear and hatred and to *be* forgiven. On your little
faith, joined with His understanding, *He* will build your part in the
Atonement and make sure that you fulfill it easily. And with Him you
will build a ladder planted in the solid rock of faith and rising even
to Heaven. Nor will you use it to ascend to Heaven alone.

^43^ Through your holy relationship, reborn and blessed in every holy
instant which you do not arrange, thousands will rise to Heaven with
you. Can you plan for this? Or could you prepare yourselves for such a
function? Yet it is possible because God wills it. Nor will He change
His Mind about it. The means and purpose both belong to Him. You have
accepted one; the other will be provided. A purpose such as this without
the means is inconceivable. He will provide the means to anyone who
shares His purpose.

^44^ Happy dreams come true, *not* because they are dreams, but only
because they are *happy*. And so they must be loving. Their message is,
"Thy Will be done," and not, "I want it otherwise." The alignment of
means and purpose is an undertaking impossible for you to understand.
You do not even realize you *have* accepted the Holy Spirit's purpose as
your own, and you would merely bring unholy means to its accomplishment.
The little faith it needed to change the purpose is all that is required
to receive the means and *use* them.

^45^ It is no dream to love your brother as yourself. Nor is your holy
relationship a dream. All that remains of dreams within it is that it is
still a special relationship. Yet it is very useful to the Holy Spirit,
Who *has* a special function here. It will become the happy dream
through which He can spread joy to thousands on thousands who believe
that love is fear, not happiness. Let Him fulfill the function that He
gave to your relationship by accepting it *for* you, and nothing will be
wanting that would make of it what He would have it be.

^46^ When you feel the holiness of your relationship is threatened by
anything, stop instantly and offer the Holy Spirit your willingness *in
spite* of fear to let Him exchange this instant for the holy one which
you would rather have. He will never fail in this. But forget not that
your relationship is one, and so it must be that whatever threatens the
peace of one is an equal threat to the other. The power of joining and
its blessing lie in the fact that it is now impossible for either of you
to experience fear alone or to attempt to deal with it alone. Never
believe that this is necessary or even possible. Yet just as this is
impossible, so is it equally impossible that the holy instant come to
either of you without the other. And it will come to both at the request
of either.

^47^ Whichever is saner at the time when the threat is perceived should
remember how deep is his indebtedness to the other and how much
gratitude is due him and be glad that he can pay his debt by bringing
happiness to both. Let him remember this, and say:

^48^ I desire this holy instant for myself\
That I may share it with my brother, whom I love.\
It is not possible that I can have it without him, or he without me.\
Yet it is wholly possible for us to share it now.\
And so I choose this instant as the one to offer to the Holy Spirit\
That His Blessing may descend on us and keep us both in peace.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Dreams and the Body**](#part0004.html#level-152) {#part0023_split_006.html#h1-152 .level1a}

^49^ There is *nothing* outside you. That is what you must ultimately
learn, for it is in that realization that the Kingdom of Heaven is
restored to you. For God created only this, and He did not depart from
it nor leave it separate from Himself. The Kingdom of Heaven is the
dwelling-place of the Son of God, who left not his Father and dwells not
apart from Him. Heaven is not a place nor a condition. It is merely an
awareness of perfect Oneness and the knowledge that there is nothing
else; nothing outside this Oneness and nothing else within.

^50^ What could God give but knowledge of Himself? What else is there to
give? The belief that you could give and get something else, something
outside yourself, has cost you the awareness of Heaven and the loss of
your Identity. And you have done a stranger thing than you yet realize.
You have displaced your guilt to your bodies from your minds. Yet a body
*cannot* be guilty, for it can do nothing of itself. You who think you
hate your bodies deceive yourselves. You hate your *minds*, for guilt
has entered into them, and they would remain separate, which they cannot
do.

^51^ Minds *are* joined; bodies are not. Only by assigning to the mind
the properties of the body does separation seem to be possible. And it
is *mind* that seems to be fragmented and private and alone. Its guilt,
which keeps it separate, is projected to the body, which suffers and
dies because it is attacked, to hold the separation in the mind and let
it not know its identity. Mind cannot attack, but it *can* make
fantasies and direct the body to act them out. Yet it is never what the
body does that seems to satisfy. Unless the mind believes the body is
actually acting out its fantasies, it will attack the body by increasing
the projection of its guilt upon it.

^52^ In this, the mind is clearly delusional. It cannot attack, but it
maintains it can and uses what it does to hurt the body to *prove* it
can. The mind cannot attack, but it *can* deceive itself. And this is
all it does when it believes it has attacked the body. It can project
its guilt, but it will not lose it through projection. And though it
clearly can misperceive the function of the body, it cannot change its
function from what the Holy Spirit establishes it to be. The body was
not made by love. Yet love does not condemn it and can use it lovingly,
respecting what the Son of God has made and using it to save him from
illusions.

^53^ Would you not have the instruments of separation reinterpreted as
means for salvation and used for purposes of love? Would you not welcome
and support the shift from fantasies of vengeance to release from them?
Your perception of the body can clearly be sick, but project not this
upon the body. For your wish to make destructive what cannot destroy can
have no real effect at all. And what God created is only what He would
have it be, being His Will. You cannot make His Will destructive. You
can make fantasies in which your will conflicts with His, but that is
all.

^54^ It is insane to use the body as the scapegoat for guilt, directing
its attack and blaming it for what you wished it to do. It is impossible
to act out fantasies. For it is still the fantasies you want, and they
have nothing to do with what the body does. It does not dream of them,
and they but make it a liability where it could be an asset. For
fantasies have made your body your "enemy," weak, vulnerable, and
treacherous, worthy of the hate which you invest in it. How has this
served you? You have *identified* with this thing you hate, the
instrument of vengeance and the perceived source of your guilt. You have
done this to a thing that has no meaning, proclaiming it to be the
dwelling-place of the Son of God and turning it against him.

^55^ This is the host of God that *you* have made. And neither God nor
His most holy Son can enter an abode which harbors hate and where you
have sown the seeds of vengeance, violence, and death. This thing you
made to serve your guilt stands between you and other minds. The minds
*are* joined, but you do not identify with them. You see yourself locked
in a separate prison, removed and unreachable, incapable of reaching out
as being reached. You hate this prison you have made and would destroy
it. But you would not escape from it, leaving it unharmed, without your
guilt upon it.

^56^ Yet only thus *can* you escape. The home of vengeance is not yours;
the place you set aside to house your hate is not a prison but an
illusion of yourself. The body is a limit imposed on the universal
communication which is an eternal property of mind. But the
communication is internal. \[It is *not* made up of different *parts*
which reach each other.\] Mind reaches to *itself*. It does not go
*out*. Within itself it has no limits, and there is nothing outside it.
\[It encompasses *everything*.\] It encompasses you entirely; you within
it, and it within you. There is nothing else, anywhere or ever.

^57^ The body is outside you, and but *seems* to surround you, shutting
you off from others and keeping you apart from them \[and them from
you\]. It is not there. There *is* no barrier between God and His Son,
nor can His Son be separated from himself except in illusions. This is
not his reality, though he believes it is. Yet this could only be if God
were wrong. God would have had to create differently and to have
separated Himself from His Son to make this possible. He would have had
to create different things and to establish different orders of reality,
only some of which were love. Yet love must be forever like itself,
changeless forever and forever without alternative. And so it is. You
cannot put a barrier around yourself because God placed none between
Himself and you.

^58^ You can stretch out your hand and reach to Heaven. You whose hands
are joined have begun to reach beyond the body, but not outside
yourselves, to reach your shared Identity together. Could this be
*outside* you? Where God is *not*? Is *He* a body, and did He create you
as He is not and where He cannot be? You are surrounded only by *Him*.
What limit can there be on you whom He encompasses? Everyone has
experienced what he would call a sense of being transported beyond
himself. This feeling of liberation far exceeds the dream of freedom
sometimes experienced in special relationships. It is a sense of actual
escape from limitations.

^59^ If you will consider what this "transportation" really entails, you
will realize that it is a sudden unawareness of the body and a joining
of yourself and something else in which your mind enlarges to encompass
it. It becomes part of you as you unite with it. And both become whole
as neither is perceived as separate. What really happens is that you
have given up the illusion of a limited awareness and lost your fear of
union. The love that instantly replaces it extends to what has freed you
and unites with it. And while this lasts, you are not uncertain of your
Identity and would not limit it. You have escaped from fear to peace,
asking no questions of reality but merely accepting it. You have
accepted this instead of the body and have let yourself be one with
something beyond it simply by not letting your mind be *limited* by it.

^60^ This can occur regardless of the physical distance which seems to
be between you and what you join, of your respective positions in space,
and of your differences in size and seeming quality. Time is not
relevant; it can occur with something past, present, or anticipated. The
"something" can be anything and anywhere-a sound, a sight, a thought, a
memory, and even a general idea without specific reference. Yet in every
case, you joined it without reservation because you love it and would be
with it. And so you rush to meet it, letting your limits melt away,
suspending all the "laws" your body obeys and gently setting them aside.

^61^ There is no violence at all in this escape. The body is not
attacked, but simply properly perceived. It does not limit you merely
because you would not have it so. You are not really "lifted out" of it;
it cannot *contain* you. You go where you would be, gaining, not losing,
a sense of self. In these instants of release from physical
restrictions, you experience much of what happens in the holy instant;
the lifting of the barriers of time and space, the sudden experience of
peace and joy, and, above all, the lack of awareness of the body and of
the questioning whether or not all this is possible.

^62^ It is possible because you *want* it. The sudden expansion of the
self which takes place with your desire for it is the irresistible
appeal the holy instant holds. It calls to you to be yourself within its
safe embrace. There are the laws of limit lifted *for* you, to welcome
you to openness of mind and freedom. Come to this place of refuge, where
you can be yourself in peace. Not through destruction, not through a
"breaking out," but merely by a quiet "melting in." For peace will join
you there simply because you have been willing to let go the limits you
have placed upon love and joined it where it is and where it led you in
answer to its gentle call to *be* at peace.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. I Need Do Nothing**](#part0004.html#level-153) {#part0023_split_007.html#h1-153 .level1a}

^63^ You still have too much faith in the body as a source of strength.
What plans do you make that do not involve its comfort or protection or
enjoyment in some way? This makes it an end and not a means in your
interpretation, and this always means you still find sin attractive. No
one accepts Atonement for himself who still accepts sin as his goal. You
have thus not met your *one* responsibility. Atonement is not welcomed
by those who prefer pain and destruction.

^64^ You have made much progress and are really trying to make still
more, but there is one thing you have never done-not for one instant
have you utterly forgotten the body. It has faded at times from your
sight, but it has not yet completely disappeared. You are not asked to
let this happen for more than an instant, yet it is in this instant that
the miracle of Atonement happens. Afterwards, you will see the body
again, but never quite the same. And every instant that you spend
without awareness of it gives you a different view of it when you
return.

^65^ At no single instant does the body exist at all. It is always
remembered or anticipated, but never experienced just *now*. Only its
past and future make it seem real. Time controls it entirely, for sin is
never present. In any single instant, the attraction of guilt would be
experienced as pain and nothing else and would be avoided. It has no
attraction *now*. Its whole attraction is imaginary and therefore must
be thought of in the past or in the future.

^66^ It is impossible to accept the holy instant without reservation
unless just for an instant you are willing to see *no* past or future.
You cannot prepare for it without placing it in the future. Release is
given you the instant you desire it. Many have spent a lifetime in
preparation and have indeed achieved their instants of success. This
course does not attempt to teach more than they learned in time, but it
does aim at *saving* time. You are attempting to follow a very long road
to the goal you have accepted. It is extremely difficult to reach
Atonement by fighting against sin. \[Enormous effort is expended in the
attempt to make holy what is hated and despised.\] Nor is a lifetime of
contemplation and long periods of meditation aimed at detachment from
the body necessary. All such attempts will ultimately succeed because of
their purpose. Yet the means are tedious and very time consuming, for
all of them look to the future for release from a state of present
unworthiness and inadequacy.

^67^ Your way will be different, not in purpose but in means. A holy
relationship is a means of *saving time*. One instant spent together
restores the universe to both of you. You *are* prepared. Now you need
but to remember you need do nothing. It would be far more profitable now
merely to concentrate on this than to consider what you should do. When
peace comes at last to those who wrestle with temptation and fight
against the giving in to sin; when the light comes at last into the mind
given to contemplation; or when the goal is finally achieved by anyone,
it *always* comes with just one happy realization: "I need do nothing."

^68^ Here is the ultimate release which everyone will one day find in
his own way, at his own time. We do not need this time. Time has been
saved for you because you are together. This is the special means this
course is using to save you time. You are not making use of the course
if you insist on using means which have served others well, neglecting
what was made for *you*. Save time for me by only this one preparation
and practice, doing nothing else. "I need do nothing" is a statement of
allegiance, a truly undivided loyalty. Believe it for just one instant,
and you will accomplish more than is given to a century of contemplation
or of struggle against temptation.

^69^ To *do* anything involves the body. And if you recognize you need
do nothing, you have withdrawn the body's value from your mind. Here is
the quick and open door through which you slip past centuries of effort
and escape from time. This is the way in which sin loses all attraction
right now. For here is time denied and past and future gone. Who need do
nothing has no need for time. To do nothing is to rest and make a place
within you where the activity of the body ceases to demand attention.
Into this place the Holy Spirit comes and there abides. He will remain
when you forget and the body's activities return to occupy your
conscious mind.

^70^ Yet there will always be this place of rest to which you can
return. And you will be more aware of this quiet center of the storm
than all its raging activity. This quiet center, in which you do
nothing, will remain with you, giving you rest in the midst of every
busy doing on which you are sent. For from this center will you be
directed how to use the body sinlessly. It is this center, from which
the body is absent, that will keep it so in your awareness of it.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Purpose of the Body**](#part0004.html#level-154) {#part0023_split_008.html#h1-154 .level1a}

^71^ It is only the awareness of the body that makes love seem limited.
For the body *is* a limit on love. The belief in limited love was its
origin, and it was made to limit the unlimited. Think not that this is
merely allegorical, for it was made to limit *you*. Can you who see
yourselves within a body know yourself as an idea? Everything you
recognize you identify with externals, something outside itself. You
cannot even think of God without a body or some form you think you
recognize.

^72^ The body cannot *know*. And while you limit your awareness to its
tiny senses, you will not see the grandeur which surrounds you. God
cannot come into a body, nor can you join Him there. Limits on love will
always seem to shut Him out and to keep you apart from Him. The body is
a tiny fence around a little part of a glorious and complete idea. It
draws a circle, infinitely small, around a very little segment of Heaven
splintered from the whole, proclaiming that within it is your kingdom,
where God can enter not.

^73^ Within this kingdom the ego rules, and cruelly. And to defend this
little speck of dust, it bids you fight against the universe. This
fragment of your mind is such a tiny part of it that, could you but
appreciate the whole, you would see instantly that it is like the
smallest sunbeam to the sun or like the faintest ripple on the surface
of the ocean. In its amazing arrogance, this tiny sunbeam has decided it
*is* the sun; this almost imperceptible ripple hails itself as the
ocean. Think how alone and frightened is this little thought, this
infinitesimal illusion, holding itself apart against the universe. The
sun becomes the sunbeam's "enemy" which would devour it, and the ocean
terrifies the little ripple and wants to swallow it.

^74^ Yet neither sun nor ocean is even aware of all this strange and
meaningless activity. They merely continue, unaware that they are feared
and hated by a tiny segment of themselves. Even that segment is not lost
to them, for it could not survive apart from them. And what it thinks it
is in no way changes its total dependence on them for its being. Its
whole existence still remains in them. Without the sun the sunbeam would
be gone; the ripple without the ocean is inconceivable.

^75^ Such is the strange position in which those in a world inhabited by
bodies seem to be. Each body seems to house a separate mind, a
disconnected thought living alone and in no way joined to the Thought by
which it was created. Each tiny fragment seems to be self-contained
needing each other for some things but by no means totally dependent on
their one Creator for everything and needing the whole to give them any
meaning, for by themselves they do mean nothing. Nor have they any life
apart and by themselves.

^76^ Like to the sun and ocean your Self continues, unmindful that this
tiny part regards itself *as* you. It is not missing; it could not exist
if it were separate, nor would the whole be whole without it. It is not
a separate kingdom, ruled by an idea of separation from the rest. Nor
does a fence surround it, preventing it from joining with the rest and
keeping it apart from its Creator. This little aspect is no different
from the whole, being continuous with it and at one with it. It leads no
separate life because its life is the oneness in which its being was
created.

^77^ Do not accept this little fenced-off aspect as yourself. The sun
and ocean are as nothing beside what you are. The sunbeam sparkles only
in the sunlight, and the ripple dances as it rests upon the ocean. Yet
in neither sun nor ocean is the power that rests in you. Would you
remain within your tiny kingdom, a sorry king, a bitter ruler of all he
surveys who looks on nothing, yet who would still die to defend it? This
little self is not your kingdom. Arched high above it and surrounding it
with love is the glorious whole, which offers all its happiness and deep
content to every part. The little aspect which you think you set apart
is no exception.

^78^ Love knows no bodies and reaches to everything created like itself.
Its total lack of limit *is* its meaning. It is completely impartial in
its giving, encompassing only to preserve and keep complete what it
would give. In your tiny kingdom, you have so little! Should it not,
then, be there that you would call on love to enter? Look at the desert,
dry and unproductive, scorched and joyless, which makes up your little
kingdom. And realize the life and joy which love would bring to it from
where it comes and where it would return with you.

^79^ The Thought of God surrounds your little kingdom, waiting at the
barrier you built to come inside and shine upon the barren ground. See
how life springs up everywhere! The desert becomes a garden, green and
deep and quiet, offering rest to those who lost their way and wander in
the dust. Give them a place of refuge, prepared by love for them where
once a desert was. And everyone you welcome will bring love with him
from Heaven for you. They enter one by one into this holy place, but
they will not depart as they had come, alone. The love they brought with
them will stay with them, as it will stay with you. And under its
beneficence, your little garden will expand and reach out to everyone
who thirsts for living water but has grown too weary to go on alone.

^80^ Go out and find them, for they bring your Self with them. And lead
them gently to your quiet garden and receive their blessing there. So
will it grow and stretch across the desert, leaving no lonely little
kingdoms locked away from love and leaving you inside. And you will
recognize yourself and see your little garden gently transformed into
the Kingdom of Heaven with all the love of its Creator shining upon it.
The holy instant is your invitation to love, to enter into your bleak
and joyless kingdom, and to transform it into a garden of peace and
welcome.

^81^ Love's answer is inevitable. It will come because you came without
the body and interposed no barriers which would interfere with its glad
coming. In the holy instant, you ask of love only what it offers
everyone, neither less nor more. Asking for everything, you will receive
it. And your shining Self will lift the tiny aspect which you tried to
hide from Heaven straight into Heaven. No part of love calls on the
whole in vain. No Son of God remains outside His Fatherhood.

^82^ Be sure of this-love has entered your special relationship and
entered fully at your weak request. You do not recognize that love has
come because you have not yet let go of all the barriers you hold
against each other. And you will not be able to give love welcome
separately. You could no more know God alone than He knows you without
your brother. But together you could no more be unaware of love than
love could know you not or fail to recognize itself in you.

^83^ You have reached the end of an ancient journey, not realizing yet
that it is over. You are still worn and tired and the desert's dust
still seems to cloud your eyes and keep you sightless. Yet He Whom you
welcomed has come to you and would welcome you. He has waited long to
give you this. Receive it now of Him, for He would have you know Him.
Only a little wall of dust still stands between you. Blow on it lightly
and with happy laughter and it will fall away and walk into the garden
love has prepared for both of you.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Delusional Thought System**](#part0004.html#level-155) {#part0023_split_009.html#h1-155 .level1a}

^84^ You have been told to bring the darkness to the light and guilt to
holiness. And you have also been told that error must be corrected at
its source. Therefore, it is the tiny part of yourself, the little
thought that seems split off and separate, which the Holy Spirit needs.
The rest is fully in God's keeping and needs no guide. Yet this wild and
delusional thought needs help because in its delusions it thinks it is
the Son of God, whole and omnipotent, sole ruler of the kingdom it set
apart to tyrannize by madness into obedience and slavery.

^85^ This is the little part of you you think you stole from Heaven.
Give it back to Heaven. Heaven has not lost it, but you have lost sight
of Heaven. Let the Holy Spirit remove it from the withered kingdom in
which you set it off, surrounded by darkness, guarded by attack, and
reinforced by hate. Within its barricades is still a tiny segment of the
Son of God, complete and holy, serene and unaware of what you think
surrounds it. Be you not separate, for the One Who does surround it has
brought union to you, returning your little offering of darkness to the
eternal Light.

^86^ How is this done? It is extremely simple, being based on what this
little kingdom really is. The barren sands, the darkness and the
lifelessness are seen only through the body's eyes. Its vision *is*
distorted, and the messages it transmits to you who made it to *limit*
your awareness *are* little and limited and so fragmented they are
meaningless. From the world of bodies, made by insanity, insane messages
seem to be returned to the mind which made it. And these messages bear
witness to this world, pronouncing it as true. For you sent forth these
messengers to bring this back to you.

^87^ Everything these messages relay to you is quite external. There are
no messages which speak of what lies underneath, for it is not the body
that could speak of this. Its eyes perceive it not; its senses remain
quite unaware of it; its tongue cannot relay its messages. Yet God can
bring you there if you are willing to follow the Holy Spirit through
seeming terror, trusting Him not to abandon you and leave you there. For
it is not His purpose to frighten you, but only yours. You are severely
tempted to abandon Him at the outside ring of fear, but He would lead
you safely through and far beyond.

^88^ The circle of fear lies just below the level the body sees and
seems to be the whole foundation on which the world is based. Here are
all the illusions, all the twisted thoughts, all the insane attacks, the
fury, vengeance, and betrayal that were made to keep the guilt in place,
so that the world could rise from it and keep it hidden. Its shadow
rises to the surface, enough to hold its most external manifestations in
darkness and to bring despair and loneliness to it and keep it joyless.
Yet its intensity is veiled by its heavy coverings and kept apart from
what was made to keep it hidden. The body cannot see this, for the body
arose from this for its protection, which must always depend on keeping
it not seen. The body's eyes will never look on it. Yet they will see
what it dictates.

^89^ The body will remain guilt's messenger and will act as it directs
as long as you believe that guilt is real. For the reality of guilt is
the illusion which seems to make it heavy and opaque, impenetrable, and
a real foundation for the ego's thought system. Its thinness and
transparency are not apparent until you see the light *behind* it. And
then you see it as a fragile veil before the light.

^90^ This heavy-seeming barrier, this artificial floor which looks like
rock, is like a bank of low dark clouds that seems to be a solid wall
before the sun. Its impenetrable appearance is wholly an illusion. It
gives way softly to the mountain tops which rise above it and has no
power at all to hold back anyone willing to climb above it and see the
sun. It is not strong enough to stop a button's fall nor hold a feather.
\[Nothing can rest upon it, for it but an *illusion* of a foundation.\]
Try but to touch it and it disappears; attempt to grasp it and your
hands hold nothing.

^91^ Yet in this cloud bank, it is easy to see a whole world rising. A
solid mountain range, a lake, a city, all rise in your imagination, and
from the clouds the messengers of your perception return to you,
assuring you that it is all there. Figures stand out and move about,
actions seem real, and forms appear and shift from loveliness to the
grotesque. And back and forth they go, as long as you would play the
game of children's make-believe. Yet however long you play it, and
regardless of how much imagination you bring to it, you do not confuse
it with the world below, nor seek to make it real.

^92^ So should it be with the dark clouds of guilt, no more impenetrable
and no more substantial. You will not bruise yourself against them in
traveling through. Let your Guide teach you their unsubstantial nature
as He leads you past them, for beneath them is a world of light whereon
they cast no shadows. Their shadows lie upon the world beyond them,
still further from the light. Yet from them *to* the light their shadows
cannot fall.

^93^ This world of light, this circle of brightness, is the real world
where guilt meets with forgiveness. Here the world outside is seen anew,
without the shadow of guilt upon it. Here are you forgiven, for here you
have forgiven everyone. Here is the new perception, where everything is
bright and shining with innocence, washed in the waters of forgiveness,
and cleansed of every evil thought you had laid upon it. Here there is
no attack upon the Son of God, and you are welcome. Here is your
innocence, waiting to clothe you and protect you and make you ready for
the final step in the journey inward. Here are the dark and heavy
garments of guilt laid by and gently replaced by purity and love.

^94^ Yet even forgiveness is not the end. Forgiveness does make lovely,
but it does not create. It is the source of healing, but it is the
messenger of love and not its Source. Here you are led that God Himself
can take the final step unhindered, for here does nothing interfere with
love, letting it be itself. A step beyond this holy place \[of
forgiveness\], a step still further inward but the one *you* cannot
take, transports you to something completely different. Here is the
Source of light-nothing perceived, forgiven, nor transformed, but merely
*known*.
:::

[]{#part0023_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The Passing of the Dream**](#part0004.html#level-156) {#part0023_split_010.html#h1-156 .level1a}

^95^ This course will *lead* to knowledge, but knowledge itself is still
beyond the scope of our curriculum. Nor is there any need for us to try
to speak of what must forever lie beyond words. We need remember only
that whoever attains the real world, beyond which learning cannot go,
will go beyond it but in a different way. Where learning ends there God
begins, for learning ends before Him Who is complete where He begins and
where there *is* no end. It is not for us to dwell on what cannot be
attained. There is too much to learn. The readiness for knowledge still
must be attained.

^96^ Love is not learned. Its meaning lies in itself. And learning ends
when you have recognized all it is *not*. That is the interference; that
is what needs to be undone. Love is not learned because there never was
a time in which you knew it not. Learning is useless in the Presence of
your Creator, Whose acknowledgment of you and yours of Him so far
transcend all learning that everything you learned is meaningless,
replaced forever by the knowledge of love and its one meaning.

^97^ Your relationship has been uprooted from the world of shadows, and
its unholy purpose has been safely brought through the barriers of
guilt, washed with forgiveness, and set shining and firmly rooted in the
world of light. From there, it calls to you to follow the course it
took, lifted high above the darkness and gently placed before the gates
of Heaven. The holy instant in which you were united is but the
messenger of love, sent from beyond forgiveness to remind you of all
that lies beyond it. Yet it is through forgiveness that it will be
remembered.

^98^ And when the memory of God has come to you in the holy place of
forgiveness, you will remember nothing else, and memory will be as
useless as learning, for your only purpose will be creating. Yet this
you cannot know until every perception has been cleansed and purified
and finally removed forever. Forgiveness removes only the *untrue*,
lifting the shadows from the world and carrying it safe and sure within
its gentleness to the bright world of new and clean perception. There is
your purpose *now*. And it is there that peace awaits you.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Nineteen**](#part0004.html#chap-19) {#part0024_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Beyond the Body**](#part0004.html#chap-19) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-157) {#part0024_split_000.html#h1-157 .level1a1}

^19:1^ We said before that when a situation has been dedicated wholly to
truth, peace is inevitable. Its attainment is the criterion by which the
wholeness of the dedication can be safely assumed. Yet we also said that
peace without faith will *never* be attained, for what is wholly
dedicated to truth as its only goal is brought to truth *by* faith. This
faith encompasses everyone involved, for only thus the situation is
perceived as meaningful and as a whole. And everyone must be involved in
it, or else your faith is limited and your dedication incomplete.

^2^ Every situation properly perceived becomes an opportunity to heal
the Son of God. And he is healed *because* you offered faith to him,
giving him to the Holy Spirit and releasing him from every demand your
ego would make of him. Thus do you see him free, and in this vision does
the Holy Spirit share. And since He shares it, He has given it, and so
He heals through *you*. It is this joining Him in a united purpose which
makes this purpose real because you make it whole. And this *is*
healing. The body is healed because you came without it and joined the
Mind in which all healing rests.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Healing and the Mind**](#part0004.html#level-158) {#part0024_split_001.html#h1-158 .level1a}

^3^ The body cannot heal because it cannot make itself sick. It *needs*
no healing. Its health or sickness depends entirely on how the mind
perceives it and the purpose which the mind would use it *for*. And it
is obvious that a segment of the mind can see itself as separated from
the Universal Purpose. When this occurs, the body becomes its weapon
used against this Purpose to demonstrate the "fact" that separation has
occurred. The body thus becomes the instrument of illusion, acting
accordingly; seeing what is not there, hearing what truth has never
said, and behaving insanely, being imprisoned *by* insanity.

^4^ Do not overlook our earlier statement that faithlessness leads
straight to illusions. For faithlessness is the perception of a brother
as a body, and the body cannot be used for purposes of union. If, then,
you see your brother as a body, you have established a condition in
which uniting with him becomes impossible. Your faithlessness to him has
separated you from him and kept you *both* apart from being healed. Your
faithlessness has thus opposed the Holy Spirit's purpose and brought
illusions centered on the body to stand between you. And the body *will*
seem to be sick, for you have made of it an "enemy" of healing and the
opposite of truth.

^5^ It cannot be difficult to realize that faith must be the opposite of
faithlessness. Yet the difference in how they operate is less apparent,
though it follows directly from the fundamental difference in what they
are. Faithlessness would always limit and attack; faith would remove all
limitations and make whole. \[Faithlessness would destroy and
*separate*; faith would unite and *heal*.\] Faithlessness would
interpose illusions between the Son of God and his Creator; faith would
remove all obstacles that seem to rise between them. Faithlessness is
wholly dedicated to illusions; faith wholly to truth. Partial dedication
is impossible. Truth is the absence of illusion; illusion the absence of
truth.

^6^ Both cannot *be* together nor perceived in the same place. To
dedicate yourself to both is to set up a goal forever impossible to
attain, for part of it is sought through the body, thought of as a means
for seeking out reality through attack, while the other part would heal
and therefore calls upon the mind and not the body. The inevitable
compromise is the belief that the body must be healed, and not the mind.
For this divided goal has given both an equal reality, which could be
possible only if the mind is limited to the body and divided into little
parts of seeming wholeness but without connection. This will not harm
the body, but it *will* keep the delusional thought system in the
*mind*.

^7^ Here then is healing needed. And it is here that healing *is*. For
God gave healing not apart from sickness, nor established remedy where
sickness cannot be. They are together, and when they are seen together,
all attempts to keep both truth and illusion in the mind, where both
must be, are recognized as dedication to illusion and given up when
brought to truth and seen as totally irreconcilable with truth in any
respect or in any way.

^8^ Truth and illusion have *no* connection. This will remain forever
true, however much you seek to connect them. But illusions are always
connected, as is truth. Each is united, a complete thought system, but
totally disconnected to each other. Where there is no overlap, there
separation must be complete. And to perceive this is to recognize where
separation is and where it must be healed. The result of an idea is
never separate from its source. The *idea* of separation produced the
body and remains connected to it, making it sick because of its
identification with it. You think you are protecting the body by hiding
this connection, for this concealment seems to keep your identification
safe from the "attack" of truth.

^9^ If you but understood how much this strange concealment has hurt
your mind and how confused your own identification has become because of
it! You do not see how great the devastation wrought by your
faithlessness. For faithlessness is an attack which seems to be
justified by its results. For by withholding faith, you see what is
unworthy of it and cannot look beyond the barrier to what is joined with
you.

^10^ To have faith is to heal. It is the sign that you have accepted the
Atonement for yourself and would therefore share it. By faith you offer
the gift of freedom from the past, which you received. You do not use
anything your brother has done before to condemn him *now*. You freely
choose to overlook his errors, looking past all barriers between your
self and his and seeing them as one. And in that one you see your faith
is fully justified. There *is* no justification for faithlessness, but
faith is *always* justified.

^11^ Faith is the opposite of fear, as much a part of love as fear is of
attack. Faith is the acknowledgment of union. It is the gracious
acknowledgment of everyone as a Son of your most loving Father, loved by
Him like you and therefore loved by you as yourself. It is His love that
joins you, and for His love you would keep no one separate from yours.
Each one appears just as he is perceived in the holy instant, united in
your purpose to be released from guilt. You saw the Christ in him, and
he was healed because you looked on what makes faith forever justified
in everyone.

^12^ Faith is the gift of God, through Him Whom God has given you.
Faithlessness looks upon the Son of God and judges him unworthy of
forgiveness. But through the eyes of faith, the Son of God is seen
already forgiven, free of all the guilt he laid upon himself. Faith sees
him only *now* because it looks not to the past to judge him, but would
see in him only what it would see in you. It sees not through the body's
eyes nor looks to bodies for its justification. It is the messenger of
the new perception sent forth to gather witnesses unto its coming and to
return their messages to you. Faith is as easily exchanged for knowledge
as is the real world. For faith arises from the Holy Spirit's perception
and is the sign you share it with Him. Faith is a gift you offer to the
Son of God through Him, and wholly acceptable to his Father as to him.
And therefore offered you.

^13^ Your holy relationship, with its new purpose, offers you faith to
give unto each other. Your faithlessness had driven you apart, and so
you did not recognize salvation in each other. Yet faith unites you in
the holiness you see, not through the body's eyes but in the sight of
Him Who joined you and in Whom you are united. Grace is not given to a
body, but to a *mind*. And the mind that receives it looks instantly
beyond the body and sees the holy place where it was healed. There is
the altar where the grace was given, in which it stands. Do you, then,
offer grace and blessing to each other, for you stand at the same altar
where grace was laid for both of you. And be you healed by grace
together, that you may heal through faith.

^14^ In the holy instant, you stand before the altar God has raised unto
Himself and both of you. Lay faithlessness aside and come to it
together. There will you see the miracle of your relationship as it was
made again through faith. And there it is that you will realize that
there is nothing faith cannot forgive. No error interferes with its calm
sight, which brings the miracle of healing with equal ease to all of
them. For what the messengers of love are sent to do *they do*,
returning the glad tidings that it was done to you who stand together
before the altar from which they were sent forth.

^15^ As faithlessness will keep your little kingdoms barren and
separate, so will faith help the Holy Spirit prepare the ground for the
most holy garden which He would make of it. For faith brings peace, and
so it calls on truth to enter and make lovely what has already been
prepared for loveliness. Truth follows faith and peace, completing the
process of making lovely which they begin. For faith is still a learning
goal, no longer needed when the lesson has been learned. Yet truth will
stay forever.

^16^ Let then your dedication be to the eternal and learn how not to
interfere with it and make it slave to time. For what you think you do
to the eternal you do to *you*. Whom God created as His Son is slave to
nothing, being lord of all along with his Creator. You can enslave a
body, but an *idea* is free, incapable of being kept in prison or
limited in any way except by the mind that thought it. For it remains
joined to its source, which is its jailor or its liberator, according to
which it chooses as its purpose for itself.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Sin versus Error**](#part0004.html#level-159) {#part0024_split_002.html#h1-159 .level1a}

^17^ It is essential that error be not confused with "sin," and it is
this distinction which makes salvation possible. For error can be
corrected, and the wrong made right. But sin, were it possible, would be
irreversible. The belief in sin is necessarily based on the firm
conviction that *minds*, not bodies, can attack. And thus the mind is
guilty and will forever so remain unless a mind not part of it can give
it absolution. Sin calls for punishment as error for correction, and the
belief that punishment *is* correction is clearly insane.

^18^ Sin is not an error, for sin entails an arrogance which the idea of
error lacks. To sin would be to violate reality and to succeed. Sin is
the proclamation that attack is real and guilt is justified. It assumes
the Son of God is guilty and has thus succeeded in losing his innocence
and making himself what God created not. Thus is creation seen as not
eternal, and the Will of God open to opposition and defeat. Sin is the
"grand illusion" underlying all the ego's grandiosity. For by it, God
Himself is changed and rendered incomplete.

^19^ The Son of God can be mistaken; he can deceive himself; he can even
turn the power of his mind against himself. But he *cannot* sin. There
is nothing he can do that would really change his reality in any way nor
make him really guilty. That is what sin would do, for such is its
purpose. Yet for all the wild insanity inherent in the whole idea of
sin, it is impossible. For the wages of sin is death, and how can the
immortal die?

^20^ A major tenet in the ego's insane religion is that sin is not error
but *truth*, and it is *innocence* that would deceive. Purity is seen as
arrogance, and the acceptance of the self as sinful is perceived as
holiness. And it is this doctrine which replaces the reality of the Son
of God as his Father created him and willed that he be forever. Is this
humility? Or is it, rather, an attempt to wrest creation away from truth
and keep it separate?

^21^ Any attempt to reinterpret sin as error is always indefensible to
the ego. The idea of sin is wholly sacrosanct to its thought system and
quite unapproachable except through reverence and awe. It is the most
"holy" concept in the ego's system-lovely and powerful, wholly true, and
necessarily protected with every defense at its disposal. For here lies
its "best" defense which all the others serve. Here is its armor, its
protection, and the fundamental purpose of the special relationship in
its interpretation.

^22^ It can indeed be said the ego made its world on sin. Only in such a
world could everything be upside-down. This is the strange illusion
which makes the clouds of guilt seem heavy and impenetrable. The
solidness this world's foundation seems to have is found in this. For
sin has changed creation from an Idea of God to an ideal the ego wants;
a world *it* rules, made up of bodies, mindless and capable of complete
corruption and decay. If this is a mistake, it can be undone easily by
truth. Any mistake can be corrected, if truth be left to judge it. But
if the mistake is given the status of truth, to what can it be brought?
The "holiness" of sin is kept in place by just this strange device. As
truth it is inviolate, and everything is brought to *it* for judgment.
As a mistake, *it* must be brought to truth. It is impossible to have
faith in sin, for sin is faithlessness. Yet it *is* possible to have
faith that a mistake can be corrected.

^23^ There is no stone in all the ego's embattled citadel more heavily
defended than the idea that sin is real-the natural expression of what
the Son of God has made himself to be and what he *is*. To the ego, this
is no mistake. For this *is* its reality; this is the "truth" from which
escape will always be impossible. This is his past, his present, and his
future. For he has somehow managed to corrupt his Father and changed His
Mind completely. Mourn, then, the death of God, Whom sin has killed! And
this would be the ego's wish, which in its madness it thinks it has
accomplished.

^24^ Would you not rather that all this be nothing more than a mistake,
entirely correctable, and so easily escaped from that its whole
correction is like walking through a mist into the sun? For that is all
it is. Perhaps you would be tempted to agree with the ego that it is far
better to be sinful than mistaken. Yet think you carefully before you
allow yourself to make this choice. Approach it not lightly, for it *is*
the choice of hell or Heaven.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Unreality of Sin**](#part0004.html#level-160) {#part0024_split_003.html#h1-160 .level1a}

^25^ The attraction of guilt is found in sin, not error. Sin will be
repeated because of this attraction. Fear can become so acute that the
sin is denied the acting out, but while the guilt remains attractive the
mind will suffer and not let go of the idea of sin. For guilt still
calls to it, and the mind hears it and yearns for it, making itself a
willing captive to its sick appeal. Sin is an idea of evil that cannot
be corrected and will be forever desirable. As an essential part of what
the ego thinks you are, you will always want it. And only an avenger
with a mind unlike your own could stamp it out through fear.

^26^ The ego does not think it possible that love, not fear, is really
called upon by sin and always *answers*. For the ego brings sin to
*fear*, demanding punishment. Yet punishment is but another form of
guilt's protection, for what is deserving punishment must have been
really done. Punishment is always the great preserver of sin, treating
it with respect and honoring its enormity. \[What must be punished *must
be true*. And what is true *must* be eternal and *will* be repeated
endlessly.\] For what you think is real you want and will not let it go.
An error, on the other hand, is not attractive. What you see clearly as
a mistake you want corrected.

^27^ Sometimes a sin can be repeated over and over with obviously
distressing results but without the loss of its appeal. And suddenly you
change its status from a sin to a mistake. Now you will not repeat it;
you will merely stop and let it go unless the guilt remains. For then
you will but change the form of sin, granting that it was an error but
keeping it uncorrectable. This is not really a change in your
perception, for it is sin that calls for punishment, not error. The Holy
Spirit cannot punish sin. Mistakes He recognizes and would correct them
all as God entrusted Him to do. But sin He knows not, nor can He
recognize mistakes which cannot be corrected. For a mistake which cannot
be corrected is meaningless to Him.

^28^ Mistakes are *for* correction, and they call for nothing else. What
calls for punishment must call for nothing. Every mistake *must* be a
call for love. What, then, is sin? What could it be but a mistake you
would keep hidden-a call for help that you would keep unheard and thus
unanswered? In time the Holy Spirit clearly sees the Son of God can make
mistakes. On this you share His vision. Yet you do not share His
recognition of the difference between time and eternity. And when
correction is completed, time is eternity.

^29^ Time is like a downward spiral which seems to travel down from a
long, unbroken line along another plane but which in no way breaks the
line or interferes with its smooth continuousness. Along the spiral, it
seems as if the line must have been broken. Yet at the line, its
wholeness is apparent. Everything seen from the spiral is misperceived,
but as you approach the line, you realize that it was not affected by
the drop into another plane at all. Yet from the plane, the line seems
discontinuous. And this is but an error in perception which can be
easily corrected in the mind, although the body's eyes will see no
change. The eyes see many things the mind corrects, and you respond, not
to the eyes' illusions, but to the mind's corrections.

^30^ You see the line as broken, and as you shift to different aspects
of the spiral, the line looks different. Yet in your mind is One Who
knows it is unbroken and forever changeless. This One can teach you how
to look on time differently and see beyond it, but not while you believe
in sin. In error, yes; for this can be corrected by the mind. But sin is
the belief that your perception is unchangeable and that the mind must
accept as true what it is told through it. If it does not obey, the mind
is judged insane. The only power which could change perception is thus
kept impotent, held to the body by the *fear* of changed perception
which its teacher, who is one with it, would bring.

^31^ When you are tempted to believe that sin is real, remember this: If
sin is real, both God and you are not. If creation is extension, the
Creator must have extended Himself, and it is impossible that what is
part of Him is totally unlike the rest. If sin is real, God must be at
war with Himself. He must be split and torn between good and evil-partly
sane and partially insane. For He must have created what wills to
destroy Him and has the *power* to do so. Is it not easier to believe
that you have been mistaken than to believe in this?

^32^ While you believe that your reality or your brother's is bounded by
a body, you will believe in sin. While you believe that bodies can
unite, you will find guilt attractive and believe that sin is precious.
For the belief that bodies limit mind leads to a perception of the world
in which the proof of separation seems to be everywhere. And God and His
creations seem to be split apart and overthrown. For sin would prove
what God created holy could not prevail against it nor remain itself
before the power of sin. Sin is perceived as *mightier* than God, before
which God Himself must bow and offer His creation to its conqueror. Is
this humility or madness?

^33^ If sin were real, it would forever be beyond the hope of healing.
For there would be a power beyond God's, capable of making another will
which could attack His Will and *overcome* it and give His Son a will
apart from His and *stronger*. And each part of God's fragmented
creation would have a different will, opposed to His and in eternal
opposition to Him and to each other. Your holy relationship has as its
purpose now the goal of proving this is impossible. Heaven has smiled
upon it, and the belief in sin has been uprooted in its smile of love.
You see it still because you do not realize that its foundation has
gone. Its source has been removed, and so it can be cherished but a
little while before it vanishes. Only the habit of looking for it still
remains.

^34^ And yet you look with Heaven's smile upon your lips and Heaven's
blessing on your sight. You will not see it long. For in the new
perception, the mind corrects it when it seems to be seen, and it
becomes invisible. And errors are quickly recognized and quickly given
to correction to be healed, not hidden. You will be healed of sin and
all its ravages the instant that you give it no power over each other.
And you will help each other overcome mistakes by joyously releasing one
another from the belief in sin.

^35^ In the holy instant, you will see the smile of heaven shining on
both of you. And you will shine upon each other in glad acknowledgment
of the grace that has been given you. For sin will not prevail against a
union Heaven has smiled upon. Your perception was healed in the holy
instant Heaven gave you. Forget what you have seen and raise your eyes
in faith to what you now can see. The barriers to heaven will disappear
before your holy sight, for you who were sightless have been given
vision, and you can see. Look not for what has been removed but for the
glory that has been restored for you to see.

^36^ Look upon your Redeemer and behold what He would show you in each
other, and let not sin arise again to blind your eyes. For sin would
keep you separate, but your Redeemer would have you look upon each other
as yourself. Your relationship is now a temple of healing-a place where
all the weary ones can come and find rest. Here is the rest that waits
for all after the journey. And it is brought nearer to all by your
relationship.

^37^ As this peace extends from deep inside yourselves to embrace all
the Sonship and give it rest, it will encounter many obstacles. Some of
them you will try to impose. Others will seem to arise from
elsewhere-from your brothers and from various aspects of the world
outside. Yet peace will gently cover them, extending past completely
unhindered. The extension of the Holy Spirit's purpose from your
relationship to others to bring them gently in \[has already begun. This
is the way in which He will bring means and goal in line. The peace He
laid deep within *both* of you\] will quietly extend to every aspect of
your lives, surrounding both of you with glowing happiness and the calm
awareness of complete protection. And you will carry its message of love
and safety and freedom to everyone who draws nigh unto your temple,
where healing waits for him.

^38^ You will not wait to give him this, for you will call to him and he
will answer you, recognizing in your call the Call of God. And you will
draw him in and give him rest, as it was given you. All this will you
do. Yet the peace which already lies deeply within must first expand and
flow across the obstacles you placed before it. This will you do, for
nothing undertaken with the Holy Spirit remains unfinished. You can
indeed be sure of nothing you see outside you, but of this you *can* be
sure: the Holy Spirit asks that you offer Him a resting-place where you
will rest in Him. He answered you and entered your relationship. Would
you not now return His graciousness and enter into a relationship with
Him? For it is He Who offered your relationship the gift of holiness,
without which it would have been forever impossible to appreciate each
other.

^39^ The gratitude you owe to Him He asks but that you receive for Him.
And when you look with gentle graciousness upon each other, you *are*
beholding Him. For you are looking where He *is* and not apart from Him.
You cannot see the Holy Spirit, but you can see your brothers truly. And
the light in them will show you all that you need to see. When the peace
in you has been extended to encompass everyone, the Holy Spirit's
function here will be accomplished. What need is there for seeing then?
When God has taken the last step Himself, the Holy Spirit will gather
all your thanks and gratitude which you have offered Him and lay them
gently before His Creator in the name of His most holy Son. And the
Father will accept them in His Name. What need is there of seeing in the
presence of His gratitude?
:::

[]{#part0024_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Obstacles to Peace**](#part0004.html#level-161) {#part0024_split_004.html#h1-161 .level1a}

# [**a. The First Obstacle: The Desire to Get Rid of It**](#part0004.html#level-162) {#part0024_split_004.html#h1-162 .level1a1}

^40^ The first obstacle that peace must flow across is your desire to
get *rid* of it. For it cannot extend unless you *keep* it. You are the
center from which it radiates outward to call the others in. You are its
home, its tranquil dwelling-place from which it gently reaches out but
never leaving you. If you would make it homeless, how can it abide
within the Son of God? If it would spread across the whole creation, it
must begin with you and from you reach to everyone who calls and bring
him rest by joining you.

^41^ Why would you want peace homeless? What do you think that it must
dispossess to dwell with you? What seems to be the cost you are so
unwilling to pay? The little barrier of sand still stands between you.
Would you reinforce it *now*? You are not asked to let it go for
yourselves alone. Christ asks it of you for Himself. He would bring
peace to everyone, and how can He do this except through you? Would you
let a little bank of sand, a wall of dust, a tiny seeming barrier, stand
between your brothers and salvation? And yet, it *is* this little
remnant of attack you cherish still against each other that is the first
obstacle the peace in you encounters in its going forth. This little
wall of hatred would still oppose the Will of God and keep it limited.

^42^ The Holy Spirit's purpose rests in peace within you. Yet you are
still unwilling to let it join you wholly. You still oppose the Will of
God, just by a little. And that little is a limit you would place upon
the whole. God's Will is One, not many. It has no opposition, for there
is none beside it. What you would still contain behind your little
barrier and keep separate from each other seems mightier than the
universe, for it would hold back the universe and its Creator. This
little wall would hide the purpose of Heaven and keep it *from* Heaven.

^43^ Would you thrust salvation away from the giver of salvation? For
such have you become. Peace could no more depart from you than from God.
Fear not this little obstacle. It cannot contain the Will of God. Peace
*will* flow across it and join you without hindrance. Salvation cannot
*be* withheld from you. It is your purpose. You *cannot* will apart from
this. You have no *purpose* apart from each other nor apart from the one
you asked the Holy Spirit to share with you. The little wall will fall
away so quietly beneath the wings of peace! For peace will send its
messengers from you to all the world. And barriers will fall away before
their coming as easily as those which you would interpose will be
surmounted.

^44^ To overcome the world is no more difficult than to surmount your
little wall. For in the miracle of your relationship, without this
barrier, is every miracle contained. There is no order of difficulty in
miracles, for they are all the same. Each is a gentle winning over from
the appeal of guilt to the appeal of love. How can this fail to be
accomplished, wherever it is undertaken? Guilt can raise no real
barriers against it. And all that seems to stand between you must fall
away because of the appeal you answered. For from you who answered, He
Who answered you would call. His home is in your holy relationship. Do
not attempt to stand between Him and His holy purpose, for it is yours.
But let Him quietly extend the miracle of your relationship to everyone
contained in it, as it was given.

^45^ There is a hush in Heaven, a happy expectancy, a little pause of
gladness in acknowledgment of the journey's end. For Heaven knows you
well, as you know Heaven. No illusions stand between you now. Look not
upon the little wall of shadows. The sun has risen over it. How can a
shadow keep you from the sun? No more can you be kept by shadows from
the light in which illusions end. Every miracle is but the end of an
illusion. Such was the journey; such its ending. And in the goal of
truth which you accepted must all illusions end.

^46^ The little insane wish to get rid of Him Who you invited in and
push Him out *must* produce conflict. As you look upon the world, this
little wish, uprooted and floating aimlessly, can land and settle
briefly upon anything, for it has no purpose now. Before the Holy Spirit
entered to abide with you, it seemed to have a *mighty* purpose; the
fixed and unchangeable dedication to sin and its results. Now it is
aimless, wandering pointlessly, causing no more than tiny interruptions
in love's appeal.

^47^ This feather of a wish, this tiny illusion, this microscopic
remnant of the belief in sin, is all that remains of what once seemed to
be the world. It is no longer an unrelenting barrier to peace. Its
pointless wandering makes its results appear to be more erratic and
unpredictable than before. Yet what could be more unstable than a
tightly-organized delusional system? Its seeming stability is its
pervasive weakness, which extends to everything. The variability which
the little remnant induces merely indicates its limited results.

^48^ How mighty can a little feather be before the great wings of truth?
Can it oppose an eagle's flight or hinder the advance of summer? Can it
interfere with the effects of summer's sun upon a garden covered by the
snow? See but how easily this little wisp is lifted up and carried away,
never to return, and part with it in gladness, not regret. For it is
nothing in itself and stood for nothing when you had greater faith in
its protection. Would you not rather greet the summer sun than fix your
gaze upon a disappearing snowflake and shiver in remembrance of the
winter's cold?
:::

[]{#part0024_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Attraction of Guilt** {#part0024_split_005.html#calibre_pb_5 .calibre6}

^49^ The attraction of guilt produces fear of love, for love would never
look on guilt at all. It is the nature of love to look upon only the
truth, for there it sees itself, with which it would unite in holy union
and completion. As love must look past fear, so must fear see love not.
For love contains the end of guilt as surely as fear depends on it.
\[Love is attracted *only* to love.\] Overlooking guilt completely, it
sees no fear. Being wholly without attack, it could not be afraid. Fear
is attracted to what love sees not, and each believes that what the
other looks upon does not exist. Fear looks on guilt with just the same
devotion that love looks on itself. And each has messengers which they
send forth and which return to them with messages written in the
language in which their going forth was asked.

^50^ Love's messengers are gently sent and return with messages of love
and gentleness. The messengers of fear are harshly ordered to seek out
guilt and cherish every scrap of evil and of sin which they can find,
losing none of them on pain of death and laying them respectfully before
their lord and master. Perception cannot obey two masters, each asking
for messages of different things in different languages. What fear would
feed upon, love overlooks. What fear demands, love cannot even see.

^51^ The fierce attraction which guilt holds for fear is wholly absent
from love's gentle perception. What love would look upon is meaningless
to fear and quite invisible. Relationships in this world are the result
of how the world is seen. And this depends on which emotion was called
on to send its messengers to look upon it and return with word of what
they saw. Fear's messengers are trained through terror, and they tremble
when their master calls upon them to serve him. For fear is merciless
even to its friends. Its messengers steal guiltily away in hungry search
of guilt, for they are kept cold and starving and made very vicious by
their master, who allows them to feast only upon what they return to
him. No little shred of guilt escapes their hungry eyes. And in their
savage search for sin, they pounce on any living thing they see and
carry it screaming to their master to be devoured.

^52^ Send not these savage messengers into the world to feast upon it
and to prey upon reality. For they will bring you word of bones and skin
and flesh. They have been taught to seek for the corruptible and to
return with gorges filled with things decayed and rotted. To them such
things are beautiful because they seem to allay their savage pangs of
hunger. For they are frantic with the pain of fear and would avert the
punishment of him who sends them forth by offering him what they hold
dear.

^53^ The Holy Spirit has given you love's messengers to send instead of
those you trained through fear. They are as eager to return to you what
they hold dear as are the others. If you send them forth, they will see
only the blameless and the beautiful, the gentle and the kind. They will
be as careful to let no little act of charity, no tiny expression of
forgiveness, no little breath of love escape their notice. And they will
return with all the happy things they found, to share them lovingly with
you. Be not afraid of *them*. They offer you salvation. Theirs are the
messages of safety, for they see the world as kind.

^54^ If you send forth only the messengers the Holy Spirit gives you,
wanting no messages but theirs, you will see fear no more. The world
will be transformed before your sight, cleansed of all guilt and softly
brushed with beauty. The world contains no fear which you laid not upon
it. And none you cannot ask love's messengers to remove from it and see
it still. The Holy Spirit has given you His messengers to send to each
other and return to each with what love sees. They have been given to
replace the hungry dogs of fear you sent instead. And they go forth to
signify the *end* of fear.

^55^ Love, too, would set a feast before you on a table covered with a
spotless cloth, set in a quiet garden where no sound but singing and a
softly joyous whispering is ever heard. This is a feast which honors
your holy relationship and at which everyone is welcomed as an honored
guest. And in a holy instant, grace is said by everyone together as they
join in gentleness before the table of communion. And I will join you
there, as long ago I promised and promise still. For in your new
relationship am I made welcome. And where I am made welcome, there *I
am*.

^56^ I am made welcome in the state of grace, which means you have at
last forgiven me. For I became the symbol of your sin, and so I had to
die instead of you. To the ego sin means death, and so Atonement is
achieved through murder. Salvation is looked upon as a way by which the
Son of God was killed instead of you.

^57^ Yet would I offer you my body, you whom I love, *knowing* its
littleness? Or would I teach that bodies cannot keep us apart? Mine was
no greater value than yours; no better means for communication of
salvation, but not its Source. No one can die for anyone, and death does
not atone for sin. Yet you can live to show it is not real. The body
does appear to be the symbol of sin while you believe that it can get
you what you want. While you believe that it can give you pleasure, you
will also believe that it can bring you pain.

^58^ To think you could be satisfied and happy with so little is to hurt
yourself, and to limit the happiness that you would have calls upon pain
to fill your meager store and make your lives complete. This *is*
completion, as the ego sees it. For guilt creeps in where happiness has
been removed and substitutes for it. Communion is another kind of
completion which goes beyond guilt because it goes beyond the body.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**b. The Second Obstacle: The Belief the Body is Valuable for What it Offers**](#part0004.html#level-163) {#part0024_split_006.html#h1-163 .level1a}

^59^ We said that peace must first surmount the obstacle of your desire
to get rid of it. Where the attraction of guilt holds sway, peace is not
wanted. The second obstacle that peace must flow across, and closely
related to the first, is the belief that the body is valuable for what
it offers. For here is the attraction of guilt made manifest in the body
and seen in it.

^60^ This \[is\] the value that you think peace would rob you of. This
is what you believe that it would dispossess and leave you homeless. And
it is this for which you would deny a home to peace. This "sacrifice"
you feel to be too great to make, too much to ask of you.

^61^ Is it a sacrifice or a release? What has the body really given you
that justifies your strange belief that in it lies salvation? Do you not
see that this is the belief in death? Here is the focus of the
perception of Atonement as murder. Here is the source of the idea that
love is fear. The Holy Spirit's messengers are sent far beyond the body,
calling the mind to join in holy communion and be at peace. Such is the
message that I gave them for you.

^62^ It is only the messengers of fear that see the body, for they look
for what can suffer. Is it a sacrifice to be removed from what can
suffer? The Holy Spirit does not demand you sacrifice the hope of the
body's pleasure; it *has* no hope of pleasure. But neither can it bring
you fear of pain. Pain is the only "sacrifice" the Holy Spirit asks, and
this He *would* remove.

^63^ Peace is extended from you only to the eternal, and it reaches out
from the eternal in you. It flows across all else. The second obstacle
is no more solid than the first. For you will neither to get rid of
peace nor limit it. What are these obstacles which you would interpose
between peace and its going forth but barriers you place between your
will and its accomplishment? You want communion, not the feast of fear.
You want salvation, not the pain of guilt. And you want your Father, not
a little mound of clay, to be your home. In your holy relationship is
your Father's Son. He has not lost communion with Him nor with himself.
When you agreed to join each other, you acknowledged this is so. This
has no cost, but it has release from cost.

^64^ You have paid very dearly for your illusions, and nothing you have
paid for brought you peace. Are you not glad that Heaven cannot be
sacrificed, and sacrifice cannot be asked of you? There is no obstacle
which you can place before our union, for in your holy relationship, I
am there already. We will surmount all obstacles together, for we stand
within the gates and not outside. How easily the gates are opened from
within to let peace through to bless the tired world! Can it be
difficult for us to walk past barriers together when you have joined the
limitless? The end of guilt is in your hands to give. Would you stop now
to look for guilt in each other?

^65^ Let me be to you the symbol of the *end* of guilt, and look upon
each other as you would look on me. Forgive me all the sins you think
the Son of God committed. And in the light of your forgiveness, he will
remember who he is and forget what never was. I ask for your
forgiveness, for if you are guilty, so must I be. But if I surmounted
guilt and overcame the world, you were with me. Would you see in me the
symbol of guilt or of the end of guilt, remembering that what I signify
to you, you see within yourself?

^66^ From your holy relationship truth proclaims the truth, and love
looks on itself. Salvation flows from deep within the home you offered
to my Father and to me. And we are there together in the quiet communion
in which the Father and the Son are joined. Oh come ye faithful to the
holy union of the Father and Son in you! And keep you not apart from
what is offered you in gratitude for giving peace its home in Heaven.
Send forth to all the world the joyous message of the end of guilt, and
all the world will answer. Think of your happiness as everyone offers
you witness of the end of sin and shows you that its power is gone
forever. Where can guilt be, when the belief in sin is gone? And where
is death, when its great advocate is heard no more?

^67^ Forgive me your illusions and release me from punishment for what I
have not done. So will you learn the freedom that I taught by teaching
freedom to each other and so releasing me. I am within your holy
relationship, yet you would imprison me behind the obstacles you raise
to freedom and bar my way to you. Yet it is not possible to keep away
One Who is there already. And in Him it *is* possible that our
communion, where we are joined already, will be the focus of the new
perception that will bring light to all the world, contained in *you*.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
## **Pleasure and Pain** {#part0024_split_007.html#calibre_pb_7 .calibre6}

^68^ Your little part is but to give the Holy Spirit the whole idea of
sacrifice. And to accept the peace He gave instead, without the limits
which would hold its extension back and so would limit your awareness of
it. For what He gives must be extended if you would have its limitless
power and use it for the Son of God's release. It is not this you would
be rid of, and having it you cannot limit it. If peace is homeless, so
are you and so am I. And He Who is our home is homeless with us. Is this
your will? Would you forever be a wanderer in search of peace? Would you
invest your hope of peace and happiness in what must fail?

^69^ Faith in the eternal is always justified, for the eternal is
forever kind, infinite in its patience, and wholly loving. It will
accept you wholly and give you peace. Yet it can unite only with what
already is at peace in you, immortal as itself. The body can bring you
neither peace nor turmoil; neither pain nor joy. It is a means and not
an end. It has no purpose of itself, but only what is given to it. The
body will seem to be whatever is the means for reaching the goal that
you assign to it. \[Only the mind can set a purpose, and only mind can
see the means for its accomplishment and justify its use.\] Peace and
guilt are both conditions of the mind to be attained. And these
conditions are the home of the emotion which called them forth and
therefore is compatible with them. But think you which it is that is
compatible with you.

^70^ Here is your choice, and it *is* free. But all that lies in it will
come with it, and what you think you are can never be apart from it. The
body is the great seeming betrayer of faith. In it lies disillusionment
and the seeds of faithlessness, but only if you ask of it what it cannot
give. Can your mistake be reasonable grounds for depression and
disillusionment and for retaliative attack on what you think has failed
you? Use not your error as the justification for your faithlessness. You
have not sinned, but you have been mistaken in what is faithful. And the
correction of your mistake will give you grounds for faith.

^71^ It is impossible to seek for pleasure through the body and not find
pain. It is essential that this relationship be understood, for it is
one the ego sees as proof of sin. It is not really punitive at all. It
is but the inevitable result of equating yourself with the body, which
is the invitation to pain. For it invites fear to enter and become your
purpose. The attraction of guilt *must* enter with it, and whatever fear
directs the body to do is therefore painful. It will share the pain of
all illusions, and the illusion of pleasure will be the same as pain.

^72^ Is not this inevitable? Under fear's orders, the body will pursue
guilt, serving its master whose attraction to guilt maintains the whole
illusion of its existence. This, then, is the attraction of pain. Ruled
by this perception, the body becomes the servant of pain, seeking it
dutifully and obeying the idea that pain is pleasure. It is this idea
that underlies all of the ego's heavy investment in the body. And it is
this insane relationship which it keeps hidden and yet feeds upon. To
you it teaches that the body's pleasure is happiness. Yet to itself it
whispers, "It is death."

^73^ Why should the body be anything to you? Certainly what it is made
of is not precious. And just as certainly, it has no feeling. It
transmits to you the feelings that you want. Like any communication
medium, the body receives and sends the messages that it is given. It
has no feeling for them. All of the feeling with which they are invested
is given by the sender and the receiver. The ego and the Holy Spirit
both recognize this, and both also recognize that here the sender and
receiver are the same. The Holy Spirit tells you this with joy. The ego
hides it, for it would keep you unaware of it. Who would send messages
of hatred and attack if he but understood he sends them to himsel*f*?
Who would accuse, make guilty, and condemn himself?

^74^ The ego's messages are always sent away from you in the belief that
for your message of attack and guilt will someone other than yourself
suffer. And even if you suffer, yet someone else will suffer more. The
great deceiver recognizes that this is not so, but as the "enemy" of
peace, it urges you to send out all your messages of hate and free
yourself. And to convince you this is possible, it bids the body search
for pain in attack upon another, calling it pleasure and offering it to
you as freedom *from* attack.

^75^ Hear not its madness, and believe not the impossible is true.
Forget not that the ego has dedicated the body to the goal of sin and
places in it all its faith that this can be accomplished. Its sad
disciples chant the body's praise continually, in solemn celebration of
the ego's rule. Not one but must believe that yielding to the attraction
of guilt is the escape from pain. Not one but must regard the body as
himself, without which he would die, and yet within which is his death
equally inevitable.

^76^ It is not given to the ego's disciples to realize that they have
dedicated themselves to death. Freedom is offered them, but they have
not accepted it, and what is offered must also be received to be truly
given. For the Holy Spirit, too, is a communication medium, receiving
from the Father and offering His messages unto the Son. Like the ego,
the Holy Spirit is both the sender and the receiver. For what is sent
through Him returns to Him, seeking itself along the way and finding
what it seeks. So does the ego find the death it seeks, returning it to
you.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**c. The Third Obstacle: The Attraction of Death**](#part0004.html#level-164) {#part0024_split_008.html#h1-164 .level1a}

^77^ To you in whose special relationship the Holy Spirit entered, it is
given to release and be released from the dedication to death. For it
was offered you, and you accepted. Yet you must learn still more about
this strange devotion, for it contains the third of the obstacles which
peace must flow across. No one can die unless he chooses death. What
seems to be the fear of death is really its attraction. Guilt, too, is
feared and fearful. Yet it could have no hold at all except on those who
are attracted to it and seek it out. And so it is with death. Made by
the ego, its dark shadow falls across all living things because the ego
is the "enemy" of life.

^78^ And yet a shadow cannot kill. What is a shadow to the living? They
but walk past, and it is gone. But what of those whose dedication it is
not to live-the black-draped "sinners," the ego's mournful chorus,
plodding so heavily away from life, dragging their chains and marching
in the slow procession which honors their grim master, lord of death?
Touch any one of them with the gentle hands of forgiveness and watch the
chains fall away along with yours. See him throw aside the black robe he
was wearing to his funeral and hear him laugh at death. The sentence sin
would lay upon him he can escape through your forgiveness.

^79^ This is no arrogance. It is the Will of God. What is impossible to
you who chose His Will as yours? What is death to you? Your dedication
is not to death nor to its master. When you accepted the Holy Spirit's
purpose in place of the ego's, you renounced death, exchanging it for
life. We know that an idea leaves not its source. And death is the
result of the thought we call the ego as surely as life is the result of
the Thought of God.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Incorruptible Body** {#part0024_split_009.html#calibre_pb_9 .calibre6}

^80^ From the ego came sin and guilt and death, in opposition to life
and innocence and to the Will of God Himself. Where can such opposition
lie but in the sick minds of the insane, dedicated to madness and set
against the peace of Heaven. One thing is sure-God, Who created neither
sin nor death, wills not that you be bound by them. He knows of neither
sin nor its results. The shrouded figures in the funeral procession
march not in honor of their Creator, Whose Will it is they live. They
are not following it; they are opposing it.

^81^ And what is the black-draped body they would bury? A body which
they dedicated to death, a symbol of corruption, a sacrifice to sin,
offered to sin to feed upon and keep itself alive-a thing condemned,
damned by its maker, and lamented by every mourner who looks upon it as
himself. You who believe you have condemned the Son of God to this *are*
arrogant. But you who would release him are but honoring the Will of his
Creator. The arrogance of sin, the pride of guilt, the sepulcher of
separation-all are part of your unrecognized dedication to death. The
glitter of guilt you laid upon the body would kill it. For what the ego
loves, it kills for its obedience. But what obeys it not, it cannot
kill.

^82^ You have another dedication which would keep the body incorruptible
and perfect as long as it is useful for your holy purpose. The body no
more dies than it can feel. It does nothing. Of itself, it is neither
corruptible nor incorruptible. It *is* nothing. It is the result of a
tiny mad idea of corruption which can be corrected. For God has answered
this insane idea with His own, an Answer which left Him not and
therefore brings the Creator to the awareness of every mind which heard
His Answer and accepted it.

^83^ You who are dedicated to the incorruptible have been given through
your acceptance the power to release from corruption. What better way to
teach the first and fundamental principle in a course on miracles than
by showing you the one which seems to be the hardest can be accomplished
first? The body can but serve your purpose. As you look upon it, so will
it seem to be. Death, were it true, would be the final and complete
disruption of communication which is the ego's goal.

^84^ Those who fear death see not how often and how loudly they call to
it and bid it come to save them from communication. For death is seen as
safety, the great dark savior from the light of truth, the answer to the
Answer, the silencer of the Voice that speaks for God. Yet the retreat
to death is not the end of conflict. Only God's Answer is its end. The
obstacle of your seeming love for death that peace must flow across
seems to be very great. For in it lies hidden all the ego's secrets, all
its strange devices for deception, all its sick ideas and weird
imaginings. Here is the final end of union, the triumph of the ego's
making over creation, the victory of lifelessness on Life Itself.

^85^ Under the dusty edge of its distorted world, the ego would lay the
Son of God, slain by its orders, proof in his decay that God Himself is
powerless before the ego's might, unable to protect the life that He
created against the ego's savage wish to kill. My brothers, children of
our Father, this is a *dream* of death. There is no funeral, no dark
altars, no grim commandments nor twisted rituals of condemnation to
which the body leads you. Ask not release of it. But free it from the
merciless and unrelenting orders you laid upon it and forgive it what
you ordered it to do. In its exaltation you commanded it to die, for
only death could conquer life. And what but insanity could look upon the
defeat of God and think it real?

^86^ The fear of death will go as its appeal is yielded to love's real
attraction. The end of sin, which nestles quietly in the safety of your
relationship, protected by your union, ready to grow into a mighty force
for God, is very near. The infancy of salvation is carefully guarded by
love, preserved from every thought that would attack it and quietly made
ready to fulfill the mighty task for which it was given you. Your
newborn purpose is nursed by angels, cherished by the Holy Spirit, and
protected by God Himself. It needs not your protection; it is *yours*.
For it is deathless, and within it lies the end of death.

^87^ What danger can assail the wholly innocent? What can attack the
guiltless? What fear can enter and disturb the peace of sinlessness?
What has been given you, even in its infancy, is in full communication
with God and you. In its tiny hands, it holds in perfect safety every
miracle you will perform, held out to you. The miracle of life is
ageless, born in time but nourished in eternity. Behold this infant to
whom you gave a resting-place by your forgiveness of each other, and see
in it the Will of God. Here is the babe of Bethlehem reborn. And
everyone who gives him shelter will follow him, not to the cross, but to
the Resurrection and the Life.

^88^ When anything seems to you to be a source of fear, when any
situation strikes you with terror and makes your body tremble and the
cold sweat of fear comes over it, remember it is always for *one*
reason-the ego has perceived it as a symbol of fear, a sign of sin and
death. Remember then that neither sign nor symbol should be confused
with source, for they must stand for something other than themselves.
Their meaning cannot lie in them but must be sought in what they
represent. And they may thus mean everything or nothing, according to
the truth or falsity of the idea which they reflect. Confronted with
such seeming uncertainty of meaning, judge it not. Remember the holy
Presence of the One given to you to be the Source of judgment. Give it
to Him to judge for you, and say:

^89^ Take this from me and look upon it, judging it for me.\
Let me not see it as a sign of sin and death\
Nor use it for destruction.\
Teach me how not to make of it an obstacle to peace,\
But let You use it for me to facilitate its coming.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**d. The Fourth Obstacle: The Fear of God**](#part0004.html#level-165) {#part0024_split_010.html#h1-165 .level1a}

^90^ What would you see without the fear of death? What would you feel
and think if death held no attraction for you? Very simply, you would
remember your Father. The Creator of life, the Source of everything that
lives, the Father of the universe and of the universe of universes and
of everything that lies even beyond them would you remember. And as this
memory rises in your mind, peace must still surmount a final obstacle
after which is salvation completed and the Son of God entirely restored
to sanity. For here your world *does* end.

^91^ The fourth obstacle to be surmounted hangs like a heavy veil before
the face of Christ. Yet as His face rises beyond it, shining with joy
because He is in His Father's Love, peace will lightly brush the veil
aside and run to meet Him and to join with Him at last. For this dark
veil, which seems to make the face of Christ Himself like to a leper's
and the bright rays of His Father's love which light His face with glory
appear as streams of blood, fades in the blazing light beyond it when
the fear of death is gone.

^92^ This is the darkest veil, upheld by the belief in death and
protected by its attraction. The dedication to death and to its
sovereignty is but the solemn vow, the promise made in secret to the ego
never to lift this veil, not to approach it nor even to suspect that it
is there. This is the secret bargain made with the ego to keep what lies
beyond the veil forever blotted out and unremembered. Here is your
promise never to allow union to call you out of separation; the great
amnesia in which the memory of God seems quite forgotten; the cleavage
of your Self from you-*the fear of God*, the final step in your
dissociation.

^93^ See how the belief in death would seem to "save" you. For if this
is gone, what can you fear but *life*? It is the attraction of death
that makes life seem to be ugly, cruel, and tyrannical. You are no more
afraid of death than of the ego. These are your chosen friends. For in
your secret alliance with them, you have agreed never to let the fear of
God be lifted so you could look upon the face of Christ and join Him in
His Father.

^94^ Every obstacle that peace must flow across is surmounted in just
the same way; the fear that raised it yields to the love beneath, and so
the fear is gone. And so it is with this. The desire to get rid of peace
and drive the Holy Spirit from you fades in the presence of the quiet
recognition that you love Him. The exaltation of the body is given up in
favor of the Spirit, which you love as you could never love the body.
And the appeal of death is lost forever as love's attraction stirs and
calls to you. From beyond each of the obstacles to love, Love Itself has
called, and each has been surmounted by the power of the attraction of
what lies beyond. Your wanting fear seemed to be holding them in place.
Yet when you heard the voice of love beyond them, you answered and they
disappeared.

^95^ And now you stand in terror before what you swore never to look
upon. Your eyes look down, remembering your promise to your "friends."
The "loveliness" of sin, the delicate appeal of guilt, the "holy" waxen
image of death, and the fear of vengeance of the ego you swore in blood
not to desert, all rise and bid you not to raise your eyes. For you
realize that if you look on this and let the veil be lifted, *they* will
be gone forever. All of your "friends," your "protectors," and your
"home" will vanish. Nothing that you remember now will you remember.

^96^ It seems to you the world will utterly abandon you if you but raise
your eyes. Yet all that will occur is you will leave the world forever.
This is the reestablishment of *your* will. Look upon it open-eyed and
you will nevermore believe that you are at the mercy of things beyond
you, forces you cannot control, and thoughts that come to you against
your will. It is your will to look on this. No mad desire, no trivial
impulse to forget again, no stab of fear, nor the cold sweat of seeming
death can stand against your will. For what attracts you from beyond the
veil is also deep *within* you, unseparated from it and completely one.
:::

[]{#part0024_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Lifting of the Veil** {#part0024_split_011.html#calibre_pb_11 .calibre6}

^97^ Forget not that you came this far together. And it was surely not
the ego that led you here. No obstacle to peace can be surmounted
through its help. It does not open up its secrets and bid you look on
them and go beyond them. It would not have you see its weakness and
learn it has no power to keep you from the truth. The Guide Who brought
you here remains with you, and when you raise your eyes, you will be
ready to look on terror with no fear at all. But first lift up your eyes
and look upon each other in innocence born of complete forgiveness of
each other's illusions and through the eyes of faith, which sees them
not.

^98^ No one can look upon the fear of God unterrified unless he has
accepted the Atonement and learned illusions are not real. No one can
stand before this obstacle alone, for he could not have reached thus far
unless his brother walked beside him. And no one would dare to look on
it without complete forgiveness of his brother in his heart. Stand you
here a while and tremble not. You will be ready. Let us join together in
a holy instant, here in this place where the purpose given in a holy
instant has led you. And let us join in faith that He Who brought us
here together will offer you the innocence you need and that you will
accept it for my love and His.

^99^ Nor is it possible to look on this too soon. This is the place to
which everyone must come when he is ready. Once he has found his
brother, he is ready. Yet merely to reach the place is not enough. A
journey without a purpose is still meaningless, and even when it is
over, it seems to make no sense. How can you know that it is over unless
you realize its purpose is accomplished? Here, with the journey's end
before you, you *see* its purpose. And it is here you choose whether to
look upon it or wander on, only to return and make the choice again.

^100^ To look upon the fear of God *does* need some preparation. Only
the sane can look on stark insanity and raving madness with pity and
compassion but not with fear. For only if they share in it does it seem
fearful, and you do share in it until you look upon each other with
perfect faith and love and tenderness. Before complete forgiveness, you
still stand unforgiving. You are afraid of God *because* you fear each
other. Those you do not forgive *you fear*. And no one reaches love with
fear beside him.

^101^ This brother who stands beside you still seems to be a stranger.
You do not know him, and your interpretation of him is very fearful. And
you attack him still, to keep what seems to be yourself unharmed. Yet in
his hands is your salvation. You see his madness, which you hate because
you share it. And all the pity and forgiveness that would heal it gives
way to fear. Brothers, you need forgiveness of each other, for you will
share in madness or in Heaven together. And you will raise your eyes in
faith together or not at all.

^102^ Beside each of you is one who offers you the chalice of Atonement,
for the Holy Spirit is in him. Would you hold his sins against him or
accept his gift to you? Is this giver of salvation your friend or enemy?
Choose which he is, remembering that you will receive of him according
to your choice. He has in him the power to forgive your sins, as you for
him. Neither can give it to himself alone. And yet your savior stands
beside each one. Let him be what he is and seek not to make of love an
enemy.

^103^ Behold your Friend, the Christ Who stands beside you. How holy and
how beautiful He is! You thought He sinned because you cast the veil of
sin upon Him to hide His loveliness. Yet still He holds forgiveness out
to you to share His holiness. This "enemy," this "stranger" still offers
you salvation as His Friend. The "enemies" of Christ, the worshipers of
sin, know not Whom they attack. This is your brother, crucified by sin,
and waiting for release from pain. Would you not offer him forgiveness,
when only he can offer it to you? For his redemption, he will give you
yours as surely as God created every living thing and loves it. And he
will give it truly, for it will be both offered and received.

^104^ There is no grace of Heaven that you cannot offer to each other
and receive from your most holy Friend. Let him withhold it not, for by
receiving it you offer it to him. \[For he *will* receive of you what
*you* received of him.\] Redemption has been given you to give each
other, and thus receive it. Whom you forgive is free, and what you give
you share. Forgive the sins your brother thinks he has committed and all
the guilt you think you see in him.

^105^ Here is the holy place of resurrection to which we come again; to
which we will return until redemption is accomplished and received.
Think who your brother is before you would condemn him. And offer thanks
to God that he is holy and has been given the gift of holiness for you.
Join him in gladness and remove all trace of guilt from his disturbed
and tortured mind. Help him to lift the heavy burden of sin you laid
upon him and he accepted as his own, and toss it lightly and with happy
laughter away from him. Press it not like thorns against his brow, nor
nail him to it unredeemed and hopeless.

^106^ Give each other faith, for faith and hope and mercy are yours to
give. Into the hands that give the gift is given. Look on your brother,
and see in him the gift of God you would receive. It is almost Easter,
the time of resurrection. Let us give redemption to each other and share
in it that we may rise as one in resurrection and not separate in death.
Behold the gift of freedom that I gave the Holy Spirit for both of you.
And be you free together, as you offer to the Holy Spirit this same
gift. And giving it, receive it of Him in return for what you gave. He
leadeth you and me together that we might meet here in this holy place
and make the same decision.

^107^ Free your brother here, as I freed you. Give him the self-same
gift, nor look upon him with condemnation of any kind. See him as
guiltless as I look on you, and overlook the sins he thinks he sees
within himself. Offer each other freedom and complete release from sin
here in the garden of seeming agony and death. So will we prepare
together the way unto the resurrection of God's Son and let him rise
again to glad remembrance of his Father, Who knows no sin, no death, but
only life eternal.

^108^ Together we will disappear into the Presence beyond the veil, not
to be lost, but *found*; not to be seen, but *known*. And knowing,
nothing in the plan God has established for salvation will be left
undone. This is the journey's purpose, without which is the journey
meaningless. Here is the peace of God, given to you eternally by Him.
Here is the rest and quiet that you seek, the reason for the journey
from its beginning. Heaven is the gift you owe each other, the debt of
gratitude you offer to the Son of God in thanks for what he is and what
his Father created him to be.

^109^ Think carefully how you would look upon the giver of this gift,
for as you look on him, so will the gift itself appear to be. As he is
seen as either the giver of guilt or of salvation, so will his offering
be seen and so received. The crucified give pain because they are in
pain. But the redeemed give joy because they have been healed of pain.
Everyone gives as he receives, but he must choose what it will *be* that
he receives. And he will recognize his choice by what he gives and what
is given him. Nor is it given anything in hell or Heaven to interfere
with his decision.

^110^ You came this far because the journey was your choice. And no one
undertakes to do what he believes is meaningless. What you had faith in
still is faithful and watches over you in faith so gentle yet so strong
that it would lift you far beyond the veil and place the Son of God
safely within the sure protection of his Father. Here is the only
purpose that gives this world and the long journey through this world
whatever meaning lies in them. Beyond this they *are* meaningless. You
stand together, still without conviction they have a purpose. Yet it is
given you to see this purpose in your holy Friend and recognize it is
your own.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter Twenty**](#part0004.html#chap-20) {#part0025_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Promise of the Resurrection**](#part0004.html#chap-20) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-166) {#part0025_split_000.html#h1-166 .level1a1}

^20:1^ This is Palm Sunday, the celebration of victory and the
acceptance of the truth. Let us not spend this holy week brooding on the
crucifixion of God's Son, but happily in the celebration of his release.
For Easter is the sign of peace, not pain. A slain Christ has no
meaning. But a *risen* Christ becomes the symbol of the Son of God's
forgiveness of himself; the sign he looks upon himself as healed and
whole.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Holy Week**](#part0004.html#level-167) {#part0025_split_001.html#h1-167 .level1a}

^2^ This week begins with palms and ends with lilies, the white and holy
sign the Son of God is innocent. Let no dark sign of crucifixion
intervene between the journey and its purpose; between the acceptance of
the truth and its expression. This week we celebrate life, not death.
And we honor the perfect purity of the Son of God and not his sins.
Offer each other the gift of lilies, not the crown of thorns; the gift
of love and not the "gift" of fear. You stand beside each other, thorns
in one hand and lilies in the other, uncertain which to give. Join now
with me and throw away the thorns, offering the lilies to replace them.
This Easter, I would have the gift of your forgiveness offered by you to
me and returned by me to you.

^3^ We *cannot* be united in crucifixion and in death. Nor can the
resurrection be complete till your forgiveness rests on Christ along
with mine. A week is short, and yet this holy week is the symbol of the
whole journey the Son of God has undertaken. He started with the sign of
victory the promise of the resurrection already given him. Let him not
wander into the temptation of crucifixion and delay him there. Help him
to go in peace beyond it, with the light of his own innocence lighting
his way to his redemption and release. Hold him not back with thorns and
nails when his redemption is so near. But let the whiteness of your
shining gift of lilies speed him on his way to resurrection.

^4^ \[Easter is not the celebration of the *cost* of sin but of its
*end*.\] If you see glimpses of the face of Christ behind the veil
looking between the snow white petals of the lilies you have received
and given as your gift, you will behold each other's face and recognize
it. I was a stranger and you took me in, not knowing who I was. Yet for
your gift of lilies you will know. In your forgiveness of this stranger,
alien to you and yet your ancient Friend, lie his release and your
redemption with him. The time of Easter is a time of joy and not of
mourning. Look on your risen Friend and celebrate his holiness along
with me. For Easter is the time of your salvation, along with mine.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Thorns and Lilies**](#part0004.html#level-168) {#part0025_split_002.html#h1-168 .level1a}

^5^ Look upon all the trinkets made to hang upon the body or to cover it
or for its use. See all the useless things made for its eyes to see.
Think on the many offerings made for its pleasure and remember all these
were made to make seem lovely what you hate. Would you employ this hated
thing to draw your brother to you and to attract his body's eyes? Learn
you but offer him a crown of thorns, not recognizing it for what it is
and trying to justify your own interpretation of its value by his
acceptance. Yet still the gift proclaims his worthlessness to you, as
his acceptance and delight acknowledges the lack of value he places on
himself.

^6^ Gifts are not made through bodies if they be truly given and
received. For bodies can neither offer nor accept; hold out nor take.
Only the mind can value, and only the mind decides on what it would
receive and give. And every gift it offers depends on what it wants. It
will adorn its chosen home most carefully, making it ready to receive
the gifts it wants by offering them to those who come unto its chosen
home or those it would attract to it. And there they will exchange their
gifts, offering and receiving what their minds judge to be worthy of
them.

^7^ Each gift is an evaluation of the receiver and the *giver*. No one
but sees in his chosen home an altar to himself. No one but seeks to
draw to it the worshippers of what he placed upon it, making it worthy
of their devotion. And each has set a light upon his altar, that they
may see what he has placed upon it and take it for their own. Here is
the value that you lay upon your brother and on yourself. Here is your
gift to both; your judgment on the Son of God for what he is. Forget not
that it is your savior to whom the gift is offered. Offer him thorns and
*you* are crucified. Offer him lilies and it is yourself you free.

^8^ I have great need for lilies, for the Son of God has not forgiven
me. And can I offer him forgiveness when he offers thorns to me? For he
who offers thorns to anyone is against me still, and who is whole
without him? Be you his friend for me that I may be forgiven and you may
look upon the Son of God as whole. But look you first upon the altar in
your chosen home and see what you have laid upon it to offer me. If it
be thorns whose points gleam sharply in a blood-red light, the body is
your chosen home, and it is separation that you offer me. And yet the
thorns are gone. Look you still closer at them now, and you will see
your altar is no longer what it was.

^9^ You look still with the body's eyes, and they can see but thorns.
Yet you have asked for and received another sight. Those who accept the
Holy Spirit's purpose as their own share also His vision. And what
enables Him to see His purpose shine forth from every altar now is yours
as well as His. He sees no strangers, only dearly loved and loving
friends. He sees no thorns, but only lilies, gleaming in the gentle glow
of peace that shines on everything He looks upon and loves.

^10^ This Easter look with different eyes upon each other. You *have*
forgiven me. And yet I cannot use your gift of lilies while you see them
not. Nor can you use what I have given unless you share it. The Holy
Spirit's vision is no idle gift, no plaything to be tossed about a while
and laid aside. Listen and hear this carefully, nor think it but a
dream-a careless thought to play with or a toy you would pick up from
time to time and then put by. For if you do, so will it be to you.

^11^ You have the vision now to look past *all* illusions. It has been
given you to see no thorns, no strangers, and no obstacles to peace. The
fear of God is nothing to you now. Who is afraid to look upon illusions,
knowing his savior stands beside him? With him, your vision has become
the greatest power for the undoing of illusion that God Himself could
give. For what God gave the Holy Spirit, you have received. The Son of
God looks unto you for his release. For you have asked for and been
given the strength to look upon this final obstacle and see no thorns
nor nails to crucify the Son of God and crown him king of death. Your
chosen home is on the other side, beyond the veil. It has been carefully
prepared for you, and it is ready to receive you now. You will not see
it with the body's eyes. Yet all you need you have.

^12^ Your home has called to you since time began, nor have you ever
failed entirely to hear. You heard but knew not *how* to look nor
*where*. And now you know. In you the knowledge lies, ready to be
unveiled and freed from all the terror that kept it hidden. There *is*
no fear in love. The song of Easter is the glad refrain the Son of God
was *never* crucified. Let us lift up our eyes together, not in fear,
but faith. And there will be no fear in us, for in our vision will be no
illusions-only a pathway to the open door of Heaven, the home we share
in quietness, and where we live in gentleness and peace as one together.

^13^ Would you not have your holy brother lead you there? His innocence
will light your way, offering you its guiding light and sure protection,
and shining from the holy altar within him where you laid the lilies of
forgiveness. Let him be to you the savior from illusions, and look on
him with the new vision that looks upon the lilies and brings you joy.
We go beyond the veil of fear, lighting each other's way. The holiness
that leads us is within us, as is our home. So will we find what we were
meant to find by Him Who leads us.

^14^ This is the way to Heaven and to the peace of Easter, in which we
join in glad awareness that the Son of God is risen from the past and
has awakened to the present. Now is he free, unlimited in his communion
with all that is within him. Now are the lilies of his innocence
untouched by guilt and perfectly protected from the cold chill of fear
and withering blight of sin alike. Your gift has saved him from the
thorns and nails, and his strong arm is free to guide you safely through
them and beyond. Walk with him now rejoicing, for the savior from
illusions has come to greet you and lead you home with him.

^15^ Here is your savior and your friend, released from crucifixion
through your vision and free to lead you now where he would be. He will
not leave you nor forsake the savior from his pain. And gladly will you
walk the way of innocence together, singing as you behold the open door
of Heaven, and recognize the home that called to you. Give joyously to
one another the freedom and the strength to lead you there. And come
before each other's holy altar where the strength and freedom wait, to
offer and receive the bright awareness that leads you home. The lamp is
lit in both of you for one another. And by the hands that gave it to
each other shall both of you be led past fear to love.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Sin as an Adjustment**](#part0004.html#level-169) {#part0025_split_003.html#h1-169 .level1a}

^16^ The belief in sin is an adjustment. And an adjustment is a change;
a shift in perception or a belief that what was so before has been made
different. Every adjustment is therefore a distortion and calls upon
defenses to uphold it against reality. Knowledge requires no adjustment
and in fact is lost if any shift or change is undertaken. For this
reduces it at once to mere perception-a way of looking in which
certainty is lost and doubt has entered. To this impaired condition
*are* adjustments necessary because they are not true. Who need adjust
to truth, which calls on only what he is, to understand?

^17^ Adjustments of any kind are of the ego. For it is the ego's fixed
belief that all relationships depend upon adjustments to make of them
what it would have them be. Direct relationships, in which there are no
interferences, are always seen as dangerous. The ego is the
self-appointed mediator of all relationships, making whatever
adjustments it deems necessary and interposing them between those who
would meet to keep them separate and prevent their union. It is this
studied interference which makes it difficult for you to recognize your
holy relationship for what it is.

^18^ The holy do not interfere with truth. They are not afraid of it,
for it is within the truth they recognized their holiness and rejoiced
at what they saw. They looked on it directly, without attempting to
adjust themselves to it or it to them. And so they *saw* that it was
*in* them, not deciding first where they would *have* it be. Their
looking merely asked a question, and it was what they saw that answered
them. *You* make the world and *then* adjust to it, and it to you. Nor
is there any difference between yourself and it in your perception,
which made them *both*.

^19^ A simple question yet remains and needs an answer. Do you *like*
what you have made-a world of murder and attack through which you thread
your timid way through constant dangers, alone and frightened, hoping at
most that death will wait a little longer before it overtakes you and
you disappear? *You made this up*. It is a picture of what you think you
are, of how you see yourself. A murderer is frightened, and those who
kill fear death. All these are but the fearful thoughts of those who
would adjust themselves to a world made fearful by their adjustments.
And they look out in sorrow from what is sad within and see the sadness
there.

^20^ Have you not wondered what the world is really like; how it would
look through happy eyes? The world you see is but a judgment on
yourself. It is not there at all. Yet judgment lays a sentence on it,
justifies it, and makes it *real*. Such is the world you see-a judgment
on yourself and made by you. This sickly picture of yourself is
carefully preserved by the ego, whose image it is and which it loves,
and placed outside you in the world. And to this world must you adjust,
as long as you believe this picture is outside and has you at its mercy.
This world *is* merciless, and were it outside you, you should indeed be
fearful. Yet it was you who *made* it merciless, and now if
mercilessness seems to look back at you, it can be *corrected*.

^21^ Who in a holy relationship can long remain unholy? The world the
holy see is one with them, just as the world the ego looks upon is like
itself. The world the holy see is beautiful because they see their
innocence in it. They did not tell it what it was; they did not make
adjustments to fit their orders. They gently questioned it and
whispered, "What are you?" And He Who watches over all perception
answered. Take not the judgment of the world as answer to the question,
"What am I?"

^22^ The world believes in sin, but the belief that made it as you see
it is not outside you. Seek not to make the Son of God \>adjust to his
insanity. There is a stranger in him who wandered carelessly into the
home of truth, and who will wander off. He came without a purpose, but
he will not remain before the shining light the Holy Spirit offered and
you accepted. For there the stranger is made homeless and you are
welcome.

^23^ Ask not this transient stranger, "What am I?" He is the only thing
in all the universe that does not know. Yet it is he you asked, and it
is to his answer that you would adjust. This one wild thought, fierce in
its arrogance and yet so tiny and so meaningless it slips unnoticed
through the universe of truth, becomes your guide. To it you turn to ask
the meaning of the universe. And of the one blind thing in all the
seeing universe of truth you ask, "How shall I look upon the Son of
God?"

^24^ Does one ask judgment of what is totally bereft of judgment? And if
you have, would you believe the answer and adjust to it as if it were
the truth? The world you look on is the answer that it gave you, and you
have given it power to adjust the world to make its answer true. You
asked this puff of madness for the meaning of your unholy relationship
and adjusted it according to its insane answer. How happy did it make
you? Did you meet with joy to bless the Son of God and give him thanks
for all the happiness which he held out to you? Did you recognize each
other as the eternal gift of God to you? Did you see the holiness that
shone in both of you to bless the other? That is the purpose of your
holy relationship. Ask not the means of its attainment of the one thing
that still would have it be unholy. Give it no power to adjust the means
and end.

^25^ Prisoners bound with heavy chains for years, starved and emaciated,
weak and exhausted and with eyes so long cast down in darkness they
remember not the light, do not leap up in joy the instant they are made
free. It takes a while for them to understand what freedom *is*. You
groped but feebly in the dust and found each other's hand, uncertain
whether to let it go or to take hold on life so long forgotten.
Strengthen your hold and raise your eyes unto your strong companion, in
whom the meaning of your freedom lies. He seemed to be crucified beside
you. And yet his holiness remained untouched and perfect, and with him
beside you, you shall this day enter with him to Paradise and know the
peace of God.

^26^ Such is my will for both of you and for each of you for one another
and for himself. Here there is only holiness and joining without limit.
For what is Heaven but union, direct and perfect, and without the veil
of fear upon it? Here are we one, looking with perfect gentleness upon
each other and on ourselves. Here all thoughts of any separation between
us become impossible. You who were prisoners in separation are now made
free in Paradise. And here would I unite with you, my friends, my
brothers, and my Self. Your gift unto each other has given me the
certainty our union will be soon.

^27^ Share, then, this faith with me and know that it is justified.
There is no fear in perfect love *because* it knows no sin and it must
look on others as on itself. Looking with charity within, what can it
fear *without*? The innocent see safety, and the pure in heart see God
within His Son and look unto the Son to lead them to the Father. And
where else would they go but where they will to be? Each of you now will
lead the other to the Father as surely as God created His Son holy and
kept him so. In your brother is the light of God's eternal promise of
your immortality. See him as sinless, and there can *be* no fear in you.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Entering the Ark**](#part0004.html#level-170) {#part0025_split_004.html#h1-170 .level1a}

^28^ Nothing can hurt you unless you give it the power to do so. For you
give power as the laws of this world interpret giving-as you give you
*lose*. It is not up to you to give power at all. Power is of God, given
by Him and reawakened by the Holy Spirit, Who knows that as you give you
*gain*. He gives no power to sin, and therefore it \>has none; nor to
its results as this world sees them-sickness and death and misery and
pain. These things have not occurred because the Holy Spirit sees them
not and gives no power to their seeming source. Thus would He keep you
free of them. Being without illusion of what you are, the Holy Spirit
merely gives everything to God, Who has already given and received all
that is true. The untrue He has neither received nor given.

^29^ Sin has no place in Heaven, where its results are alien and can no
more enter than can their source. And therein lies your need to see your
brother sinless. In him is Heaven. See sin in him instead, and Heaven is
lost to you. But see him as he is, and what is yours shines from him to
you. Your savior gives you only love, but what you would receive of him
is up to you. It lies in him to overlook all your mistakes, and therein
lies his own salvation. And so it is with yours. \[Salvation is a lesson
in giving, as the Holy Spirit interprets it.\] It is the reawakening of
the laws of God in minds that have established other laws and given them
power to enforce what God created not.

^30^ Your insane laws were made to guarantee that you would make
mistakes and give them power over you by accepting their results as your
just due. What could this be but madness? And is it this that you would
see within your savior from insanity? He is as free from this as you
are, and in the freedom that you see in him, you see your own. For this
you share. What God has given follows His laws and His alone. Nor is it
possible for those who follow them to suffer the results of any other
source.

^31^ Those who choose freedom will experience only its results. Their
power is of God, and they will give it only to what God has given to
share with them. Nothing but this can touch them, for they see only
this, sharing their power according to the Will of God. And thus their
freedom is established and maintained. It is upheld through all
temptation to imprison and to be imprisoned. It is of them who learned
of freedom that you should ask what freedom is. Ask not the sparrow how
the eagle soars, for those with little wings have not accepted for
themselves the power to share with you.

^32^ The sinless give as they received. See, then, the power of
sinlessness within your brother and share with him the power of the
release from sin you offered him. To each who walks this earth in
seeming solitude is a savior given, whose special function here is to
release him and so to free himself. In the world of separation, each is
appointed separately, though they are all the same. Yet those who know
that they are all the same need not salvation. And each one finds his
savior when he is ready to look upon the face of Christ and see Him
sinless.

^33^ The plan is not of you, nor need you be concerned with anything
except the part that has been given you to learn. For He Who knows the
rest will see to it without your help. But think not that He does not
need your part to help Him with the rest. For in your part lies *all* of
it, without which is no part complete, nor is the whole completed
without your part. The ark of peace is entered two by two, yet the
beginning of another world goes with them. Each holy relationship must
enter here to learn its special function in the Holy Spirit's plan, now
that it shares His purpose. And as this purpose is fulfilled, a new
world rises in which sin can enter not, and where the Son of God can
enter without fear, and where he rests a while to forget imprisonment
and to remember freedom. How can he enter, to rest and to remember,
without you? Except you be there, he is not complete. And it is his
completion that he remembers there.

^34^ This is the purpose given you. Think not that your forgiveness of
each other serves but you two alone. For the whole new world rests in
the hands of every two who enter here to rest. And as they rest, the
face of Christ shines on them, and they remember the laws of God,
forgetting all the rest and yearning only to have His laws perfectly
fulfilled in them and all their brothers. Think you when this has been
achieved that you will rest without them? You could no more leave one of
them outside than I could leave you and forget part of myself.

^35^ You may wonder how you can be at peace when, while you are in time,
there is so much that must be done before the way to peace is open.
Perhaps this seems impossible to you. But ask yourself if it is possible
that God would have a plan for your salvation that does not work. Once
you accept His plan as the one function that you would fulfill, there
will be nothing else the Holy Spirit will not arrange for you without
your effort.

^36^ He will go before you making straight your path and leaving in your
way no stones to trip on and no obstacles to bar your way. Nothing you
need will be denied you. Not one seeming difficulty but will melt away
before you reach it. You need take thought for nothing, careless of
everything except the only purpose that you would fulfill. As that was
given you, so will its fulfillment be. God's guarantee will hold against
all obstacles, for it rests on certainty and not contingency. It rests
on *you*. And what can be more certain than a Son of God?
:::

[]{#part0025_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Heralds of Eternity**](#part0004.html#level-171) {#part0025_split_005.html#h1-171 .level1a}

^37^ In this world, God's Son comes closest to himself in a holy
relationship. There he begins to find the certainty his Father has in
him. And there he finds his function of restoring his Father's laws to
what was held outside them and finding what was lost. Only in time can
*anything* be lost, and *never* lost forever. So do the parts of God's
Son gradually join in time, and with each joining is the end of time
brought nearer. Each miracle of joining is a mighty herald of eternity.
No one who has a single purpose, unified and sure, can be afraid. No one
who shares his purpose with him can *not* be one with him.

^38^ Each herald of eternity sings of the end of sin and fear. Each
speaks in time of what is far beyond it. Two voices raised together call
to the hearts of everyone and let them beat as one. And in that single
heart beat is the unity of love proclaimed and given welcome. Peace to
your holy relationship, which has the power to hold the unity of the Son
of God together. You give to one another for everyone, and in your gift
is everyone made glad. Forget not Who has given you the gifts you give,
and through your not forgetting this will you remember Who gave the
gifts to Him to give to you.

^39^ It is impossible to overestimate your brother's value. Only the ego
does this, but all it means is that it wants the other for itself and
therefore values him too *little*. What is inestimable clearly cannot
*be* evaluated. Do you recognize the fear that rises from the
meaningless attempt to judge what lies so far beyond your judgment you
cannot even see it? Judge not what is invisible to you or you will never
see it, but wait in patience for its coming. It will be given you to see
your brother's worth when all you want for him is peace. And what you
want for him, you will receive.

^40^ How can you estimate the worth of him who offers peace to you? What
would you want except his offering? His worth has been established by
his Father, and you will recognize it as you receive his Father's gift
through him. What is in him will shine so brightly in your grateful
vision that you will merely love him and be glad. You will not think to
judge him, for who would see the face of Christ and yet insist that
judgment still has meaning? For this insistence is of those who do not
see. Vision or judgment is your choice, but never both of these.

^41^ Your brother's body is as little use to you as it is to him. When
it is used only as the Holy Spirit teaches it *has* no function, for
minds need not the body to communicate. The sight that sees the body has
no use which serves the purpose of a holy relationship. And while you
look upon each other thus, the means and end have not been brought in
line. Why should it take so many holy instants to let this be
accomplished, when one would do? There is but one. The little breath of
eternity that runs through time like golden light is all the
same-nothing before it, nothing afterwards.

^42^ *You* look upon each holy instant as a different point in time.
*It* never changes. All that it ever held or will ever hold is here
right now. The past takes nothing from it, and the future will add no
more. Here, then, is everything. Here is the loveliness of your
relationship, with means and end in perfect harmony already. Here is the
perfect faith that you will one day offer to each other *already*
offered you. And here the limitless forgiveness you will give each other
*already* given; the face of Christ you yet will look upon *already*
seen.

^43^ Can you evaluate the giver of a gift like this? Would you exchange
this gift for any other? This gift returns the laws of God to your
remembrance. And merely by remembering them, the laws that held you
prisoner to pain and death must be forgotten. This is no gift your
brother's body offers you. The veil that hides the gift hides him as
well. He is the gift, and yet he knows it not. No more do you. And yet,
have faith that He Who sees the gift in both of you will offer and
receive it for you both. And through His vision will you see it, and
through His understanding recognize it and love it as your own.

^44^ Be comforted and feel the Holy Spirit watching over you in love and
perfect confidence in what He sees. He knows the Son of God and shares
his Father's certainty the universe rests in his gentle hands in safety
and in peace. Let us consider now what he must learn, to share his
Father's confidence in him. What is he, that the Creator of the universe
should offer it to him and know it rests in safety? He looks upon
himself not as his Father knows him. And yet it is impossible the
confidence of God should be misplaced.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Temple of the Holy Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-172) {#part0025_split_006.html#h1-172 .level1a}

^45^ The meaning of the Son of God lies solely in his relationship with
his Creator. If it were elsewhere, it would rest upon contingency, but
there *is* nothing else. And this is wholly loving and forever. Yet has
the Son of God invented an unholy relationship between him and his
Father. His real relationship is one of perfect union and unbroken
continuity. The one he made is partial, self-centered, broken into
fragments, and full of fear. The one created by his Father is wholly
self-encompassing and self-extending. The one he made is wholly
self-destructive and self-limiting.

^46^ Nothing can show the contrast better than the experience of both a
holy and an unholy relationship. The first is based on love and rests on
it, serene and undisturbed. The body does not intrude upon it. Any
relationship in which the body enters is based not on love, but on
idolatry. Love wishes to be known, completely understood, and shared. It
has no secrets; nothing that it would keep apart and hide. It walks in
sunlight, open-eyed and calm, in smiling welcome and in sincerity so
simple and so obvious it cannot be misunderstood. But idols do not
share.

^47^ Idols accept, but never make return. They can be loved, but cannot
love. They do not understand what they are offered, and any relationship
in which they enter has lost its meaning. They live in secrecy, hating
the sunlight and happy in the body's darkness where they can hide and
keep their secrets hidden along with them. And they have no
relationships, for no one else is welcome there. They smile on no one,
and those who smile on them they do not see.

^48^ Love has no darkened temples where mysteries are kept obscure and
hidden from the sun. It does not seek for power, but for relationships.
The body is the ego's chosen weapon for seeking power *through*
relationships. And its relationships \>must be unholy, for what they
are, it does not even see. It wants them solely for the offerings on
which its idols thrive. The rest it merely throws away, for all that it
could offer is seen as valueless. Homeless, the ego seeks as many bodies
as it can collect to place its idols in and so establish them as temples
to itself.

^49^ The Holy Spirit's temple is not a body, but a relationship. The
body is an isolated speck of darkness; a hidden secret room, a tiny spot
of senseless mystery, a meaningless enclosure carefully protected, yet
hiding nothing. Here the unholy relationship escapes reality and seeks
for crumbs to keep itself alive. Here it would drag its brothers,
holding them here in its idolatry. Here it is "safe," for here love
cannot enter. The Holy Spirit does not build His temples where love can
never be. Would He Who sees the face of Christ choose as His home the
only place in all the universe where it can *not* be seen?

^50^ You *cannot* make the body the Holy Spirit's temple, and it will
*never* be the seat of love. It is the home of the idolaters and of
love's condemnation. For here is love made fearful and hope abandoned.
Even the idols that are worshiped here are shrouded in mystery and kept
apart from those who worship them. This is the temple dedicated to no
relationships and no return. Here is the "mystery" of separation
perceived in awe and held in reverence. What God would have *not* be is
here kept "safe" from Him. But what you do not realize is what you fear
within your brother and would not see in him is what makes God seem
fearful to you and kept unknown.

^51^ Idolaters will always be afraid of love, for nothing so severely
threatens them as love's approach. Let love draw near them and overlook
the body, as it will surely do, and they retreat in fear, feeling the
seeming firm foundation of their temple begin to shake and loosen.
Brothers, you tremble with them. Yet what you fear is but the herald of
escape. This place of darkness is not your home. Your temple is not
threatened. You are idolaters no longer. The Holy Spirit's purpose lies
safe in your relationship and not your bodies. You have *escaped* the
body. Where you are the body cannot enter, for the Holy Spirit has set
His temple there.

^52^ There is no order in relationships. They either *are* or not. An
unholy relationship is no relationship. It is a state of isolation which
seems to be what it is not. No more than that. The instant that the mad
idea of making your relationship with God unholy seemed to be possible,
all your relationships were made meaningless. In that unholy instant,
time was born and bodies made to house the mad idea and give it the
illusion of reality. And so it seemed to have a home that held together
for a little while in time and vanished. For what could house this mad
idea against reality but for an instant?

^53^ Idols *must* disappear and leave no trace behind their going. The
unholy instant of their seeming power is frail as is a snowflake, but
without its loveliness. Is this the substitute you want for the eternal
blessing of the holy instant and its unlimited beneficence? Is the
malevolence of the unholy relationship, so seeming powerful and so
bitterly misunderstood and so invested in a false attraction, your
preference to the holy instant which offers you peace and understanding?
Then lay aside the body and quietly transcend it, rising to welcome what
you really want. And from His holy temple, look you not back on what you
have awakened from. For no illusions can attract the minds that have
transcended them and left them far behind.

^54^ The holy relationship reflects the true relationship the Son of God
has with his Father in reality. The Holy Spirit rests within it in the
certainty it will endure forever. Its firm foundation is eternally
upheld by truth, and love shines on it with the gentle smile and tender
blessing it offers to its own. Here the unholy instant is exchanged in
gladness for the holy one of safe return. Here is the way to true
relationships held gently open, through which you walk together, leaving
the body thankfully behind and resting in the Everlasting Arms. Love's
arms are open to receive you and give you peace forever.

^55^ The body is the ego's idol; the belief in sin made flesh and then
projected outward. This produces what seems to be a wall of flesh around
the mind, keeping it prisoner in a tiny spot of space and time, beholden
unto death and given but an instant in which to sigh and grieve and die
in honor of its master. And this unholy instant seems to be life; an
instant of despair, a tiny island of dry sand, bereft of water and set
uncertainly upon oblivion. Here does the Son of God stop briefly by to
offer his devotion to death's idols, and then pass on. And here he is
more dead than living. Yet it is also here he makes his choice again
between idolatry and love.

^56^ Here it is given him to choose to spend this instant paying tribute
to the body or let himself be given freedom from it. Here he can accept
the holy instant, offered him to replace the unholy one he chose before.
And here can he learn relationships are his salvation and not his doom.
You who are learning this may still be fearful, but you are not
immobilized. The holy instant is of greater value now to you than its
unholy seeming counterpart, and you have learned you really want but
one. This is no time for sadness. Perhaps confusion, but hardly
discouragement.

^57^ You have a *real* relationship, and it *has* meaning. It is as like
your real relationship with God as equal things are like unto each
other. Idolatry is past and meaningless. Perhaps you fear each other a
little yet; perhaps a shadow of the fear of God remains with you. Yet
what is that to those who have been given one true relationship *beyond*
the body? Can they be long held back from looking on the face of Christ?
And can they long withhold the memory of their relationship with their
Father from themselves and keep remembrance of His love apart from their
awareness?
:::

[]{#part0025_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Consistency of Means and End**](#part0004.html#level-173) {#part0025_split_007.html#h1-173 .level1a}

^58^ We have said much about discrepancies of means and end and how
these must be brought in line before your holy relationship can bring
you only joy. But we have also said the means to meet the Holy Spirit's
goal will come from the same Source as does His purpose. Being so simple
and direct, this course has nothing in it that is not consistent. The
seeming inconsistencies or parts you find more difficult than others are
merely indications of areas where means and end are still discrepant.
And this produces great discomfort. This need not be. This course
requires almost nothing of you. It is impossible to imagine one that
asks so little or could offer more.

^59^ The period of discomfort that follows the sudden change in a
relationship from sin to holiness should now be almost over. To the
extent you still experience it, you are refusing to leave the means to
Him Who changed the purpose. You recognize you want the goal. Are you
not also willing to accept the means? If you are not, let us admit that
*you* are inconsistent. A purpose is attained by means, and if you want
a purpose, you must be willing to want the means as well. How can one be
sincere and say, "I want this above all else, and yet I do not want to
learn the means to get it"?

^60^ To obtain the goal, the Holy Spirit indeed asked little. He asks no
more to give the means as well. The means are second to the goal. And
when you hesitate, it is because the purpose frightens you, and not the
means. Remember this, for otherwise you will make the error of believing
the means are difficult. Yet how can they be difficult if they are
merely given you? They guarantee the goal, and they are perfectly in
line with it. Before we look at them a little closer, remember that if
you think they are impossible, your wanting of the purpose has been
shaken. For if a goal is possible to reach, the means to do so must be
possible as well.

^61^ It *is* impossible to see your brother as sinless and yet to look
upon him as a body. Is this not perfectly consistent with the goal of
holiness? For holiness is merely the result of letting the effects of
sin be lifted so what was always true is recognized. To see a sinless
*body* is impossible, for holiness is positive, and the body is merely
neutral. It is not sinful, but neither is it sinless. As nothing, which
it is, the body cannot meaningfully be invested with attributes of
Christ or of the ego. Either must be an error, for both would place the
attributes where they cannot be. And both must be undone for purposes of
truth.

^62^ The body *is* the means by which the ego tries to make the unholy
relationship seem real. The unholy instant *is* the time of bodies. But
the *purpose* here is sin. It cannot be attained but in illusion, and so
the illusion of a brother as a body is quite in keeping with the purpose
of unholiness. Because of this consistency, the means remain
unquestioned while the end is cherished. Vision adapts to wish, for
sight is always secondary to desire. And if you see the body, you have
chosen judgment and not vision. For vision, like relationships, has no
order. You either *see* or not.

^63^ Who sees a brother's body has laid a judgment on him and sees him
not. He does not really see him as sinful; he does not see him at all.
In the darkness of sin, he is invisible. He can but be imagined in the
darkness, and it is here that the illusions you hold about him are not
held up to his reality. Here are illusions and reality kept separated.
Here are illusions never brought to truth and always hidden from it. And
here in darkness is your brother's reality imagined as a body, in unholy
relationships with other bodies, serving the cause of sin an instant
before he dies.

^64^ There is indeed a difference between this vain imagining and
vision. The difference lies not in them, but in their purpose. Both are
but means, each one appropriate to the end for which it is employed.
Neither can serve the purpose of the other, for each one is a choice of
purpose, employed on its behalf. Either is meaningless without the end
for which it was intended, nor is it valued as a separate thing apart
from the intention. The means seem real because the goal is valued. And
judgment has no value unless the goal is sin.

^65^ The body cannot be looked upon except through judgment. To see the
body is the sign that you lack vision and have denied the means the Holy
Spirit offers you to serve His purpose. How can a holy relationship
achieve its purpose through the means of sin? Judgment you taught
yourself; vision is learned from Him Who would undo your teaching. His
vision cannot see the body because it cannot look on sin. And thus it
leads you to reality. Your holy brother, sight of whom is your release,
is no illusion. Attempt to see him not in darkness, for your imaginings
about him will seem real there. You closed your eyes to shut him out.
Such was your purpose, and while this purpose seems to have any meaning,
the means for its attainment will be evaluated as worth the seeing, and
so you will not see.

^66^ Your question should not be, "How can I see my brother without the
body?" Ask only, "Do I really wish to see him sinless?" And as you ask,
forget not that his sinlessness is *your* escape from fear. Salvation is
the Holy Spirit's goal. The means is vision. For what the seeing look
upon *is* sinless. No one who loves can judge, and what he sees *is*
free of condemnation. And what he sees he did not make, for it was given
him to see, as was the vision which made his seeing possible.
:::

[]{#part0025_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Vision of Sinlessness**](#part0004.html#level-174) {#part0025_split_008.html#h1-174 .level1a}

^67^ Vision will come to you at first in glimpses, but they will be
enough to show you what is given you who see your brother sinless. Truth
is restored to you through your desire, as it was lost to you through
your desire for something else. Open the holy place which you closed off
by valuing the "something else," and what was never lost will quietly
return. It has been saved for you. Vision would not be necessary had
judgment not been made. Desire now its whole undoing, and it is done for
you.

^68^ Do you not want to know your own Identity? Would you not happily
exchange your doubts for certainty? Would you not willingly be free of
misery and learn again of joy? Your holy relationship offers all this to
you. As it was given you, so will be its effects. And as its holy
purpose was not made by you, the means by which its happy end is yours
is also not of you. Rejoice in what is yours but for the asking and
think not that you need make either means or end. All this is given you
who would but see your brother sinless. All this is given, waiting on
your desire but to receive it. Vision is freely given to those who ask
to see.

^69^ Your brother's sinlessness is given you in shining light, to look
on with the Holy Spirit's vision and to rejoice in along with Him. For
peace will come to all who ask for it with real desire and sincerity of
purpose, shared with the Holy Spirit and at one with Him on what
salvation is. Be willing, then, to see your brother sinless that Christ
may rise before your vision and give you joy. And place no value on your
brother's body, which holds him to illusions of what he is. It is his
desire to see his sinlessness, as it is yours. And bless the Son of God
in your relationship, nor see in him what you have made of him.

^70^ The Holy Spirit guarantees that what God willed and gave you shall
be yours. This is your purpose now, and the vision that makes it yours
is ready to be given. You have the vision which enables each one to see
the body not. And as you look upon each other, you will see an altar to
your Father, holy as Heaven, glowing with radiant purity and sparkling
with the shining lilies you laid upon it. What can you value more than
this? Why do you think the body is a better home, a safer shelter for
God's Son? Why would you rather look on it than on the truth? How can
the engine of destruction be preferred and chosen to replace the holy
home the Holy Spirit offers, where He will dwell with you?

^71^ The body is the sign of weakness, vulnerability, and loss of power.
Can such a savior help you? Would you turn in your distress and need for
help unto the helpless? Is the pitifully little the perfect choice to
call upon for strength? Judgment will seem to make your savior weak. Yet
it is *you* who need his strength. There is no problem, no event or
situation, no perplexity that vision will not solve. All is redeemed
when looked upon with vision. For this is not *your* sight, and brings
with it the laws beloved of Him Whose sight it *is.*

^72^ Everything looked upon with vision falls gently into place
according to the laws brought to it by His calm and certain sight. The
end for everything He looks upon is always sure. For it will meet His
purpose, seen in unadjusted form and suited perfectly to meet it.
Destructiveness becomes benign, and sin is turned to blessing under His
gentle gaze. What can the body's eyes perceive, with power to correct?
Its eyes *adjust* to sin, unable to overlook it in any form and seeing
it everywhere, in everything. Look through its eyes, and everything will
stand condemned before you. All that could save you, you will never see.
Your holy relationship, the source of your salvation, will be deprived
of meaning, and its most holy purpose bereft of means for its
accomplishment.

^73^ Judgment is but a toy, a whim, the senseless means to play the idle
game of death in your imagination. But vision sets all things right,
bringing them gently within the kindly sway of Heaven's laws. What if
you recognized this world is an hallucination? What if you really
understood you made it up? What if you realized that those who seem to
walk about in it, to sin and die, attack and murder and destroy
themselves, are wholly unreal? Could you have faith in what you see if
you *accepted* this? And would you *see* it?

^74^ Hallucinations disappear when they are recognized for what they
are. This is the healing and the remedy. Believe them not, and they are
gone. And all you need to do is recognize *you* did this. Once you
accept this simple fact and take unto yourself the power you gave them,
you are released from them. One thing is sure-hallucinations serve a
purpose, and when that purpose is no longer held, they disappear.
Therefore, the question never is whether you want them, but always, do
you want the purpose which they serve? This world seems to hold out many
purposes, each different and with different values. Yet they are all the
same. Again there is no order but a seeming hierarchy of values.

^75^ Only two purposes are possible. And one is sin, the other holiness.
Nothing is in between, and which you choose determines what you see. For
what you see is merely how you elect to meet your goal. Hallucinations
serve to meet the goal of madness. They are the means by which the
outside world, projected from within, adjusts to sin and seems to
witness to its reality. It still is true that nothing is without. Yet
upon nothing are all projections made. For it is the projection which
gives the "nothing" all the meaning that it holds.

^76^ What has no meaning cannot be perceived. And meaning always looks
within to find itself and *then* looks out. All meaning that you give
the world outside must thus reflect the sight you saw within; or better,
if you saw at all or merely judged against. Vision is the means by which
the Holy Spirit translates your nightmares into happy dreams; your wild
hallucinations that show you all the fearful outcomes of imagined sin
into the calm and reassuring sights with which He would replace them.
These gentle sights and sounds are looked on happily and heard with joy.
They are His substitutes for all the terrifying sights and screaming
sounds the ego's purpose brought to your horrified awareness. They step
away from sin, reminding you that it is not reality which frightens you
and that the errors which you made can be corrected.

^77^ When you have looked on what seemed terrifying and seen it change
to sights of loveliness and peace; when you have looked on scenes of
violence and death and watched them change to quiet views of gardens
under open skies, with clear, life-giving water running happily beside
them in dancing brooks that never waste away, who need persuade you to
accept the gift of vision? And after vision, who is there who could
refuse what must come after? Think but an instant just on this-you can
behold the holiness God gave His Son. And never need you think that
there is something else for you to see.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 21**](#part0004.html#chap-21) {#part0026_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Inner Picture**](#part0004.html#chap-21) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-175) {#part0026_split_000.html#h1-175 .level1a1}

^21:1^ Projection makes perception. The world you see is what you gave
it, nothing more than that. But though it is no more than that, it is
not less. Therefore, to you it is important. It is the witness to your
state of mind, the outside picture of an inward condition. As a man
thinketh, so does he perceive. Therefore, seek not to change the world,
but will to change your mind *about* the world. Perception is a
*result*, not a cause. And that is why order of difficulty in miracles
is meaningless. Everything looked upon with vision is healed and holy.
Nothing perceived without it means anything. And where there is no
meaning, there is chaos.

^2^ Damnation is your judgment on yourself, and this you *will* project
upon the world. See it as damned, and all you see is what you did to
hurt the Son of God. If you behold disaster and catastrophe, you tried
to crucify him. If you see holiness and hope, you joined the Will of God
to set him free. There is no choice that lies between these two
decisions. And you *will* see the witness to the choice you made and
learn from this to *recognize* which one you chose. \[The world you see
but shows you how much joy *you* have allowed yourself to see in you and
to accept as *yours*. And if this *is* its meaning, then the power to
*give* it joy *must* lie *within* you.\]
:::

[]{#part0026_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Imagined World**](#part0004.html#level-176) {#part0026_split_001.html#h1-176 .level1a}

^3^ Never forget the world the sightless "see" must be imagined, for
what it really looks like is unknown to them. They must infer what could
be seen from evidence forever indirect and reconstruct their inferences
as they stumble and fall because of what they did not recognize, or walk
unharmed through open doorways which they thought were closed. And so it
is with you. You do not see. Your cues for inference are wrong, and so
you stumble and fall down upon the stones you did not recognize, but
fail to be aware you *can* go through the doors you thought were closed
but which stand open before unseeing eyes, waiting to welcome you.

^4^ How foolish it is to attempt to judge what could be seen instead. It
is not necessary to imagine what the world must look like. It must be
seen before you recognize it for what it is. You can be shown which
doors are open, and you can see where safety lies and which way leads to
darkness, which to light. Judgment will *always* give you false
directions, but vision *shows* you where to go. Why should you guess?

^5^ There is no need to learn through pain. And gentle lessons are
acquired joyously and are remembered gladly. What gives you happiness
you *want* to learn and not forget. It is not this you would deny.
*Your* question is whether the means by which this course is learned
will *bring* to you the joy it promises. If you believed it would, the
learning of it would be no problem. You are not happy learners yet
because you still remain uncertain that vision gives you *more* than
judgment does, and you have learned that *both* you cannot have.

^6^ The blind become accustomed to their world by their adjustments to
it. They think they know their way about in it. They learned it, not
through joyous lessons, but through the stern necessity of limits they
believed they could not overcome. And still believing this, they hold
those lessons dear and cling to them *because* they cannot see. They do
not understand the lessons *keep* them blind. This they do not believe.
And so they keep the world they learned to "see" in their imagination,
believing that their choice is that or nothing. They hate the world they
learned through pain. And everything they think is in it serves to
remind them that they are incomplete and bitterly deprived.

^7^ Thus they *define* their life and where they live, adjusting to it
as they think they must, afraid to lose the little that they have. And
so it is with all who see the body as all they have and all their
brothers have. They try to reach each other, and they fail and fail
again. And they adjust to loneliness, believing that to keep the body is
to save the little that they have. Listen and try to think if you
remember what we will speak of now.

^8^ Listen-perhaps you catch a hint of an ancient state not quite
forgotten; dim, perhaps, and yet not altogether unfamiliar, like a song
whose name is long forgotten, and the circumstances in which you heard
completely unremembered. Not the whole song has stayed with you, but
just a little wisp of melody, attached not to a person or a place or
anything particular. But you remember from just this little part how
lovely was the song, how wonderful the setting where you heard it, and
how you loved those who were there and listened with you.

^9^ The notes are nothing. Yet you have kept them with you, not for
themselves, but as a soft reminder of what would make you weep if you
remembered how dear it was to you. You could remember, yet you are
afraid, believing you would lose the world you learned since then. And
yet you know that nothing in the world you learned is half so dear as
this. Listen and see if you remember an ancient song you knew so long
ago and held more dear than any melody you taught yourself to cherish
since.

^10^ Beyond the body, beyond the sun and stars, past everything you see
and yet somehow familiar, is an arc of golden light that stretches as
you look into a great and shining circle. And all the circle fills with
light before your eyes. The edges of the circle disappear, and what is
in it is no longer contained at all. The light expands and covers
everything, extending to infinity, forever shining and with no break or
limit anywhere. Within it everything is joined in perfect continuity.
Nor is it possible to imagine that anything could be outside, for there
is nowhere that this light is not.

^11^ This is the vision of the Son of God, whom you know well. Here is
the sight of him who knows his Father. Here is the memory of what you
are-a part of this, with all of it within and joined to all as surely as
all is joined in you. Accept the vision which can show you *this* and
not the body. You know the ancient song and know it well. Nothing will
ever be as dear to you as is this ancient hymn \[of love\] the Son of
God sings to his Father still.

^12^ And now the blind can see, for that same song they sing in honor of
their Creator gives praise to them as well. The blindness which they
made will not withstand the memory of this song. And they will look upon
the vision of the Son of God, remembering who he is they sing of. What
is a miracle but this remembering? And who is there in whom this memory
lies not? The light in one awakens it in all. And when you see it in
each other, you *are* remembering for everyone.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Responsibility for Sight**](#part0004.html#level-177) {#part0026_split_002.html#h1-177 .level1a}

^13^ We have repeated how little is asked of you to learn this course.
It is the same small willingness you need to have your whole
relationship transformed to joy; the little gift you offer to the Holy
Spirit for which He gives you everything; the very little on which
salvation rests; the tiny change of mind by which the crucifixion is
changed to resurrection. And being true, it is so simple that it cannot
fail to be completely understood. Rejected yes, but *not* ambiguous. And
if you choose against it now, it will not be because it is obscure, but
rather that this little cost seemed in your judgment to be too much to
pay for peace.

^14^ This is the only thing that you need do for vision, happiness,
release from pain, and the complete escape from sin, all to be given
you. Say only this, but mean it with no reservations, for here the power
of salvation lies:

^15^ I am responsible for what I see.\
I chose the feelings I experience, and I decided\
on the goal I would achieve.\
And everything that seems to happen to me\
I asked for and received as I had asked.

^16^ Deceive yourself no longer that you are helpless in the face of
what is done to you. Acknowledge but that you have been *mistaken,* and
all effects of your mistakes will disappear.

^17^ It is impossible the Son of God be merely driven by events outside
of him. It is impossible that the happenings that come to him were not
his choice. His power of decision is the determiner of every situation
in which he seems to find himself by chance or accident. No accident nor
chance is possible within the universe as God created it, outside of
which is nothing. Suffer, and you decided sin was your goal. Be happy,
and you gave the power of decision to Him Who must decide for God for
you. This is the little gift you offer to the Holy Spirit, and even this
He gave to you to give yourself. For by this gift is given you the power
to release your savior that he may give salvation unto you.

^18^ Begrudge not, then, this little offering. Withhold it, and you keep
the world as now you see it. Give it away, and everything you see goes
with it. Never was so much given for so little. In the holy instant is
this exchange effected and maintained. Here is the world you do not want
brought to the one you do. And here the one you do is given you
*because* you want it. Yet for this, the power of your wanting must
first be recognized. You must accept its *strength* and not its
weakness. You must perceive that what is strong enough to make a world
can let it go and can accept correction if it is willing to see that it
was wrong.

^19^ The world you see is but the idle witness that you were right. This
witness is insane. You trained it in its testimony, and as it gave it
back to you, you listened and convinced yourself that what it saw was
true. You did this to *yourself*. See only this, and you will also see
how circular the reasoning on which your "seeing" rests. This was not
given you. This was your gift to you and to your brother. Be willing,
then, to have it taken from him and be replaced with truth. And as you
look upon the change in him, it will be given you to see it in yourself.

^20^ Perhaps you do not see the need for you to give this little
offering. Look closer, then, at what it *is*. And very simply see in it
the whole exchange of separation for salvation. All that the ego is, is
an idea that it is possible that things should happen to the Son of God
*without* his will and thus without the Will of his Creator, Whose Will
cannot *be* separate from his own.

^21^ This is the Son of God's *replacement* for his will, a mad revolt
against what must forever be. This is the statement that he has the
power to make God powerless and so to take it for himself and leave
himself without what God has willed for him. This is the mad idea you
have enshrined upon your altars and which you worship. And anything
which threatens this seems to attack your faith, for here is it
invested. Think not that you are faithless, for your belief and trust in
this is strong indeed.

^22^ The Holy Spirit can give you faith in holiness and vision to see it
easily enough. But you have not left open and unoccupied the altar where
the gifts belong. Where *they* should be, you have set up your idols to
something else. This other will, which seems to tell you what must
happen, you gave reality. And what would show you otherwise must
therefore seem unreal. All that is asked of you is to make room for
truth. You are not asked to make or do what lies beyond your
understanding. All you are asked to do is *let it in*; only to stop your
interference with what will happen of itself; simply to recognize again
the presence of what you thought you gave away.

^23^ Be willing for an instant to leave your altars free of what you
placed upon them, and what is really there you *cannot* fail to see. The
holy instant is not an instant of creation but of recognition. For
recognition comes of vision and suspended judgment. Then only is it
possible to look within and see what *must* be there plainly in sight
and wholly independent of inference and judgment. Undoing is not your
task, but it *is* up to you to welcome it or not. Faith and desire go
hand in hand, for everyone believes in what he wants.

^24^ We have already said that wishful thinking is how the ego deals
with what it wants to make it so. There is no better demonstration of
the power of wanting, and therefore of faith, to make its goals seem
real and possible. Faith in the unreal leads to adjustments of reality
to make it fit the goal of madness. The goal of sin induces the
perception of a fearful world to justify its purpose. What you desire
you *will* see. And if its reality is false, you will uphold it by not
realizing all the adjustments you have introduced to make it so.

^25^ When vision is denied, confusion of cause and effect becomes
inevitable. The purpose now becomes to keep obscure the cause of the
effect and make effect appear to be a *cause*. This seeming independence
of effect enables it to be regarded as standing by itself and capable of
serving as a cause of the events and feelings its maker thinks it
causes. Long ago we spoke of your desire to create your own Creator and
be father and not son to Him. This is the same desire. The Son is the
effect, whose Cause he would deny. And so he seems to *be* the cause,
producing real effects. Nothing can have effects without a cause and to
confuse the two is merely to fail to understand them both.

^26^ It is as needful that you recognize you made the world you see as
that you recognize that you did not create yourself. *They are the same
mistake*. Nothing created not by your Creator has any influence over
you. And if you think what you have made can tell you what you see and
feel and place your faith in its ability to do so, you are denying your
Creator and believing that you made yourself. For if you think the world
you made has power to make you what it wills, you *are* confusing Son
and Father, effect and Source.

^27^ The Son's creations are like his Father's. Yet in creating them,
the Son does not delude himself that he is independent of his Source.
His union with It is the Source of his creating. *Apart* from this he
has no power to create, and what he makes is meaningless. It changes
nothing in creation, depends entirely upon the madness of its maker, and
cannot serve to justify the madness. Your brother thinks he made the
world with you. Thus he denies creation. With you, he thinks the world
he made made him. Thus he *denies* he made it.

^28^ Yet the truth is you were both created by a loving Father, Who
created you together and as one. See what "proves" otherwise, and you
deny your whole reality. But grant that everything which seems to stand
between you keeping you from each other and separate from your Father
you made in secret, and the instant of release has come to you. All its
effects are gone because its source has been uncovered. It is its
seeming independence of its source that kept you prisoner. This is the
same delusion that you are independent of the Source by which you were
created and have never left.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Faith, Belief, and Vision**](#part0004.html#level-178) {#part0026_split_003.html#h1-178 .level1a}

^29^ All special relationships have sin as their goal. For they are
bargains with reality, toward which the seeming union is adjusted.
Forget not this-to bargain is to set a limit, and any brother with whom
you have a limited relationship *you* hate. You may attempt to keep the
bargain in the name of "fairness," sometimes demanding payment of
yourself, perhaps more often of the other. Thus in the "fairness" you
attempt to ease the guilt that comes from the accepted purpose of the
relationship. And that is why the Holy Spirit must change its purpose to
make it useful to *him* and harmless unto *you*.

^30^ If you accept this change, you have accepted the idea of making
room for truth. The *source* of sin is gone. You may imagine that you
still experience its effects, but it is not your purpose, and you no
longer *want* it. No one allows a purpose to be replaced while he
desires it, for nothing is so cherished and protected as is a goal the
mind accepts. This it will follow, grimly or happily, but always with
faith and with the persistence that faith inevitably brings. The power
of faith is *never* recognized if it is placed in sin. But it is
*always* recognized if it is placed in love.

^31^ Why is it strange to you that faith can move mountains? This is
indeed a little feat for such a power. For faith can keep the Son of God
in chains as long as he believes he *is* in chains. And when he is
released from them, it will be simply because he no longer believes in
them, withdrawing faith that they can hold him and placing it in his
freedom instead. It is impossible to place equal faith in opposite
directions. What faith you give to sin you *take* away from holiness.
And what you offer holiness has been *removed* from sin.

^32^ Faith and belief and vision are the means by which the goal of
holiness is reached. Through them the Holy Spirit leads you to the real
world and away from all illusions where your faith was laid. This is His
direction, the only one He ever sees. And when you wander, He reminds
you there *is* but one. His faith and His belief and vision are all for
you. And when you have accepted them completely instead of yours, you
will have need of them no longer. For faith and vision and belief are
meaningful only *before* the state of certainty is reached. In Heaven
they are unknown. Yet Heaven is reached through them.

^33^ It is impossible that the Son of God lack faith, but he can choose
where he would have it *be*. Faithlessness is not a *lack* of faith, but
faith in *nothing*. Faith given to illusions does not lack power, for by
it does the Son of God believe that he is powerless. Thus is he
faithless to himself, but strong in faith in his illusions *about*
himself. For faith, perception, and belief *you* made as means for
losing certainty and finding sin. This mad direction was your choice,
and by your faith in what you chose, you made what you desired.

^34^ The Holy Spirit has a use for all the means for sin by which you
sought to find it. But as He uses them, they lead *away* from sin
because His purpose lies in the opposite direction. He sees the *means*
you use but not the *purpose* for which you made them. He would not take
them from you, for He sees their value as a means for what *He* wills
for you. You made perception that you might choose among your brothers
and seek for sin with them. The Holy Spirit sees perception as a means
to teach you that the vision of a holy relationship is all you *want* to
see. Then will you give your faith to holiness, desiring and believing
in it *because* of your desire.

^35^ Faith and belief become attached to vision, as all the means that
once served sin are redirected now toward holiness. For what you think
is sin is *limitation*, and whom you try to limit to the body you hate
because you fear. In your refusal to forgive him, you would condemn him
to the body because the means for sin are dear to you. And so the body
has your faith and your belief. But holiness would set your brother
free, removing hatred by removing fear, not as a symptom, but at its
source.

^36^ Those who would free their brothers from the body can *have* no
fear. They have renounced the means for sin by choosing to let all
limitations be removed. Desiring to look upon their brothers in
holiness, the power of belief and faith goes far beyond the body,
*supporting* vision, not obstructing it. But first they chose to
recognize how much their faith had limited their understanding of the
world, desiring to place its power elsewhere should another point of
view be given them. The miracles which follow this decision are also
born of faith. For all who choose to look away from sin are given vision
and are led to holiness.

^37^ Those who believe in sin *must* think the Holy Spirit asks for
sacrifice, for this is how they think *their* purpose is accomplished.
Brothers, the Holy Spirit knows that sacrifice brings *nothing*. He
makes no bargains. And if you seek to limit Him, you will hate Him
because you are afraid. The gift that He has given you is more than
anything that stands this side of Heaven. The instant for its
recognition is at hand. Join your awareness to what has been *already*
joined. The faith you give each other can accomplish this. For He Who
loves the world is seeing it for you without one spot of sin upon it and
in the innocence which makes the sight of it as beautiful as Heaven.

^38^ Your faith in sacrifice has given it great power in your sight,
except you do not realize you cannot see *because* of it. For sacrifice
must be exacted of a body and by another body. The mind could neither
ask it nor receive it of itself. And no more could the body. The
intention is in the mind, which tries to use the body to carry out the
means for sin in which the *mind* believes. Thus is the joining of mind
and body an inescapable belief of those who value sin. And so is
sacrifice invariably a means for limitation and thus for hate.

^39^ Think you the Holy Spirit is concerned with *this*? He gives not
what it is His purpose to lead you *from*. You think He would deprive
you for your good. But "good" and "deprivation" are opposites and cannot
meaningfully join in any way. It is like saying that the moon and sun
are one because they come with night and day, and so they *mus*t be
joined. Yet sight of one is but the sign the other has disappeared from
sight. Nor is it possible that what gives light be one with what depends
on darkness to be seen. Neither demands the sacrifice of the other. Yet
on the *absence* of the other does each depend.

^40^ The body was made to be a sacrifice to sin, and in the darkness so
it still is seen. Yet in the light of vision, it is looked upon quite
differently. You *can* have faith in it to serve the Holy Spirit's goal
and give it power to serve as means to help the blind to see. But in
their seeing, they look *past* it, as do you. The faith and the belief
you gave it *belongs* beyond. You gave perception and belief and faith
from mind to body. Let them now be given back to what produced them and
can use them still to save itself from what it made.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Fear to Look Within**](#part0004.html#level-179) {#part0026_split_004.html#h1-179 .level1a}

^41^ The Holy Spirit will *never* teach you that you are sinful. Errors
He will correct, but this makes no one fearful. You are indeed afraid to
look within and see the sin you think is there. This you would not be
fearful to admit. Fear in association with sin the ego deems quite
appropriate and smiles approvingly. It has no fear to let you feel
ashamed. It doubts not your belief and faith in sin. Its temples do not
shake because of this. Your faith that sin is there but witnesses to
your desire that it *be* there to see. This merely seems to be the
source of fear.

^42^ Remember that the ego is not alone. Its rule *is* tempered, and its
unknown "enemy," Whom it cannot even see, it fears. Loudly the ego tells
you not to look inward, for if you do, your eyes will light on sin, and
God will strike you blind. This you believe, and so you do not look. Yet
this is not the ego's hidden fear, nor yours who serve it. Loudly indeed
the ego claims it is---*too* loudly and *too* often. For underneath this
constant shout and frantic proclamation, the ego is not certain it is
so. Beneath your fear to look within because of sin is yet another fear
and one which makes the ego tremble.

^43^ What if you looked within and saw *no* sin? This "fearful" question
is one the ego *never* asks. And you who ask it now are threatening the
ego's whole defensive system too seriously for it to bother to pretend
it is your friend. Those who have joined their brothers *have* detached
themselves from their belief that their identity lies in the ego. A holy
relationship is one in which you join with what is part of you in
*truth*. And your belief in sin has been *already* shaken, nor are you
now entirely unwilling to look within and see it not.

^44^ Your liberation still is only partial-still limited and incomplete,
yet born within you. Not wholly mad, you have been willing to look on
much of your insanity and recognize its madness. Your faith is moving
inward, past insanity and on to reason. And what your reason tells you
now, the ego would not hear. The Holy Spirit's purpose was accepted by
the part of your mind the ego knows not of. No more did *you*. And yet
this part with which you now identify is not afraid to look upon itself.
It *knows* no sin. How, otherwise, could it have been willing to see the
Holy Spirit's purpose as its own?

^45^ This part has seen your brother and recognized him perfectly since
time began. And it desired nothing but to join with him and to be free
again, as once it was. It has been waiting for the birth of freedom, the
acceptance of release to come to you. And now you recognize that it was
not the ego that joined the Holy Spirit's purpose, and so there *must*
be something else. Think not that *this* is madness. For this your
*reason* tells you, and it follows perfectly from what you have already
learned.

^46^ There is no inconsistency in what the Holy Spirit teaches. This is
the reasoning of the *sane*. You have perceived the ego's madness and
not been made afraid because you did not choose to share in it. At times
it still deceives you. Yet in your saner moments, its ranting strikes no
terror in your hearts. For you have realized that all the gifts it would
withdraw from you in rage at your "presumptuous" wish to look within,
you do not *want*. A few remaining trinkets still seem to shine and
catch your eye. Yet you would not "sell" Heaven to have them.

^47^ And now the ego *is* afraid. Yet what it hears in terror, the other
part hears as the sweetest music-the song it longed to hear since first
the ego came into your minds. The ego's weakness is its strength. The
song of freedom, which sings the praises of another world, brings to it
hope of peace. For it *remembers* Heaven, and now it sees that Heaven
has come to earth at last, from which the ego's rule has kept it out so
long. Heaven has come because it found a home in your relationship on
earth. And earth can hold no longer what has been given Heaven as its
own.

^48^ Look gently on each other and remember the ego's weakness is
revealed in both your sight. What it would keep apart has met and
joined, and looks upon the ego unafraid. Little children, innocent of
sin, follow in gladness the way to certainty. Be not held back by fear's
insane insistence that sureness lies in doubt. This has no meaning. What
matters it to you how loudly it is proclaimed? The senseless is not made
meaningful by repetition and by clamor. The quiet way is open. Follow it
happily and question not what must be so.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Reason and Perception**](#part0004.html#level-180) {#part0026_split_005.html#h1-180 .level1a}

^49^ Perception selects and makes the world you see. It literally picks
it out as the mind directs. The laws of size and shape and brightness
would hold, perhaps, if other things were equal. They are *not* equal.
For what you look for you are far more likely to discover than what you
would prefer to overlook. The still small Voice for God is not drowned
out by all the ego's raucous screams and senseless ravings to those who
*want* to hear it. Perception is a *choice* and not a fact. But on this
choice depends far more than you may realize as yet. For on the voice
you choose to hear and on the sights you choose to see, depends entirely
your whole belief in what you *are*. Perception is a witness but to this
and *never* to reality. Yet it can show you the conditions in which
awareness of reality is possible or those where it could never be.

^50^ Reality needs no cooperation from you to be itself. But your
awareness of it needs your help because it is your choice. Listen to
what the ego says and see what it directs you see, and it is sure that
you will see yourself as tiny, vulnerable, and afraid. You will
experience depression, a sense of worthlessness, and feelings of
impermanence and unreality. You will believe that you are helpless prey
to forces far beyond your own control and far more powerful than you.
And you will think the world you made directs your destiny. For this
will be your *faith*. But never believe because it is your faith it
makes reality.

^51^ There is another vision and another Voice in which your freedom
lies awaiting but your choice. And if you place your faith in them, you
will perceive another Self in you. This other Self sees miracles as
natural. They are as simple and natural to It as breathing to the body.
They are the obvious response to calls for help, the only one It makes.
Miracles seem unnatural to the ego because it does not understand how
separate minds can influence each other. Nor *could* they do so. But
minds cannot *be* separate. This other Self is perfectly aware of this.
And thus It recognizes that miracles do not affect another's mind, only
Its own. \[They always change *your* mind.\] There *is* no other.

^52^ You do not realize the whole extent to which the idea of separation
has interfered with reason. Reason lies in the other Self you have cut
off from your awareness. And nothing you have allowed to stay in it is
capable of reason. How can the segment of the mind devoid of reason
understand what reason is or grasp the information it would give? All
sorts of questions may arise in it, but if the basic question stems from
reason, it will not ask it. Like all that stems from reason, the basic
question is obvious, simple, and remains unasked. But think not reason
could not answer it.

^53^ God's plan for your salvation could not have been established
without your will and your consent. It must have been accepted by the
Son of God, for what God wills for him he *must* receive. For God wills
not apart from him, nor does the Will of God wait upon time to be
accomplished. Therefore, what joined the Will of God must be in you
*now*, being eternal. You must have set aside a place in which the Holy
Spirit can abide and where He *is*. He must have been there since the
need for Him arose and was fulfilled in the same instant. Such would
your reason tell you if you listened. Yet such is clearly not the ego's
"reasoning." Its alien nature to the ego is proof you will not find the
answer there. Yet if it must be so, it must exist. And if it exists for
you and has your freedom as the purpose given it, you must be free to
*find* it.

^54^ God's plan is simple-never circular and never self-defeating. He
has no Thoughts except the Self-*extending*, and in this your will must
be included. Thus, there must be a part of you that knows His Will and
shares it. It is not meaningful to ask if what must be is so. But it
*is* meaningful to ask why you are *unaware* of what is so, for this
must have an answer if the plan of God for your salvation is complete.
And it must *be* complete because its Source knows not of incompletion.
Where would the answer be but in the Source? And where are *you* but
there, where this same answer is? Your Identity, as much a true effect
of this same Source as is the answer, must therefore be together and the
same.

^55^ Oh yes, you know this and more than this alone. Yet any part of
knowledge threatens dissociation as much as all of it. And all of it
*will* come with any part. Here is the part you can accept. What reason
points to you can see because the witnesses on its behalf are clear.
Only the totally insane can disregard them, and you have gone past this.
Reason is a means which serves the Holy Spirit's purpose in its own
right. It is not reinterpreted and redirected from the goal of sin as
are the others. For reason is beyond the ego's range of means.

^56^ Faith and perception and belief can be misplaced and serve the
great deceiver's needs as well as truth. But reason has no place at all
in madness, nor can it be adjusted to fit its end. Faith and belief are
strong in madness, guiding perception toward what the mind has valued.
But reason enters not at all in this. For the perception would fall away
at once if reason were applied. There *is* no reason in insanity, for it
depends entirely on reason's absence. The ego never uses it because it
does not realize that it exists. The partially insane have access to it,
and only they have need of it. Knowledge does not depend on it, and
madness keeps it out.

^57^ The part of mind where reason lies was dedicated by your will in
union with your Father's to the undoing of insanity. Here was the Holy
Spirit's purpose accepted and accomplished both at once. Reason is alien
to insanity, and those who use it have gained a means which *cannot* be
applied to sin. Knowledge is far beyond attainment of any kind. But
reason can serve to open doors you closed against it.

^58^ You have come very close to this. Faith and belief have shifted,
and you have asked the question which the ego will *never* ask. Does not
your reason tell you now the question must have come from something that
you do not know but must belong to you? Faith and belief, upheld by
reason, cannot fail to lead to changed perception. And in this change is
room made way for vision. Vision extends beyond itself, as does the
purpose which it serves and all the means for its accomplishment.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Reason and Correction**](#part0004.html#level-181) {#part0026_split_006.html#h1-181 .level1a}

^59^ Reason cannot see sin but *can* see errors and leads to their
correction. It does not value them, but their correction. Reason will
also tell you when you think you sin, you call for help. Yet if you will
not accept the help you call for, you will not believe that it is yours
to give. And so you will not give it, thus *maintaining* the belief. For
uncorrected error of any kind deceives you about the power that is in
you to *make* correction. If it can correct and you allow it not to do
so, you deny it to yourself and to your brother. And if he shares this
same belief, you both will think that you are damned. This you could
spare him and *yourself*. For reason would not make way for correction
in you alone.

^60^ Correction cannot be accepted or refused by you *without* your
brother. Sin would maintain it can. Yet reason tells you that you cannot
see your brother or yourself as sinful and still perceive the other
innocent. Who looks upon himself as guilty and sees a sinless world? And
who can see a sinful world and look upon himself apart from it? Sin
would maintain you must be separate. But reason tells you that this must
be wrong. If you are joined, how could it be that you have private
thoughts? And how could thoughts that enter into what but seems like
yours alone have no effect at all on what *is* yours? If minds are
joined, this is impossible.

^61^ No one can think but for himself, as God thinks not without His
Son. Only were both in bodies could this be. Nor could one mind think
only for itself unless the body *were* the mind. For only bodies can be
separate and therefore unreal. The home of madness cannot be the home of
reason. Yet it is easy to leave the home of madness if you see reason.
You do not leave insanity by going somewhere else. You leave it simply
by accepting reason where madness was. Madness and reason see the same
things, but it is certain that they look upon them differently.

^62^ Madness is an attack on reason that drives it out of mind and takes
its place. Reason does not attack but takes the place of madness
quietly, replacing madness if it be the will of the insane to listen to
it. But the insane know not their will. For they believe they see the
body and let their madness tell them it is real. Reason would be
incapable of this. And if you would defend the body against your reason,
you will not understand the body or yourself.

^63^ The body does not separate you from your brother, and if you think
it does, you are insane. But madness has a purpose and believes it also
has the means to make its purpose real. To see the body as a barrier
between what reason tells you *must* be joined must be insane. Nor could
you see it if you heard the voice of reason. What can there be that
stands between what is continuous? And if there is nothing in between,
how can what enters part be kept away from other parts? Reason would
tell you this. But think what you must recognize if it be so.

^64^ If you choose sin instead of healing, you would condemn the Son of
God to what can never be corrected. You tell him by your choice that he
is damned-separate from you and from his Father forever and without a
hope of safe return. You teach him this, and you will learn of him
*exactly* what you taught. For you can teach him only that he is as you
would have him, and what you choose he be is but your choice for *you*.
Yet think not this is fearful. That you are joined to him is but a fact,
not an interpretation. How can a fact be fearful unless it disagrees
with what you hold more dear than truth? Reason will tell you that this
fact is your *release*. Neither your brother nor yourself can be
attacked alone. But neither can accept a miracle instead *without* the
other being blessed by it and healed of pain.

^65^ Reason, like love, would reassure you and seeks not to frighten
you. The power to heal the Son of God is given you because he *must* be
one with you. You *are* responsible for how he sees himself. And reason
tells you it is given you to change his whole mind, which is one with
you, in just an instant. And any instant serves to bring complete
correction of his errors and make him whole. The instant that you choose
to let *yourself* be healed, in that same instant is his whole salvation
seen as complete with yours. Reason is given you to understand that this
is so. For reason, kind as is the purpose for which it is the means,
leads steadily away from madness toward the goal of truth. And here you
will lay down the burden of denying truth. *This* is the burden that is
terrible, and not the truth.

^66^ That you are joined is your salvation-the gift of Heaven, not the
gift of fear. Does Heaven seem to be a burden to you? In madness, yes.
And yet what madness sees must be dispelled by reason. Reason assures
you Heaven is what you *want*, and *all* you want. Listen to Him Who
speaks with reason and brings your reason into line with His. Be willing
to let reason be the means by which He would direct you how to leave
insanity behind. Hide not behind insanity in order to escape from
reason. What madness would conceal, the Holy Spirit still holds out for
everyone to look upon with gladness.

^67^ You *are* your brother's savior. He is *yours.* Reason speaks
happily indeed of this. This gracious plan was given love by Love. And
what Love plans is like Itself in this: being united, It would have you
learn what *you* must be. And being one with It, it must be given you to
give what It has given and gives still. Spend but an instant in the glad
acceptance of what is given you to give your brother, and learn with him
what has been given *both* of you. To give is no more blessed than to
receive. But neither is it less.

^68^ The Son of God is *always* blessed as one. And as his gratitude
goes out to you who blessed him, reason will tell you that it cannot be
you stand apart from blessing. The gratitude he offers you reminds you
of the thanks your Father gives you for completing Him. And here alone
does reason tell you that you can understand what you must be. Your
Father is as close to you as is your brother. Yet what is there that
could be nearer you than is your Self?

^69^ The power that you have over the Son of God is not a threat to his
reality. It but *attests* to it. Where could his freedom lie but in
himself if he be free already? And who could bind him but himself if he
deny his freedom? God is not mocked; no more His Son can be imprisoned
save by his own desire. And it is by his own desire that he is freed.
Such is his strength and not his weakness. He *is* at his own mercy. And
where he chooses to be merciful, there is he free. But where he chooses
to condemn instead, there is he held a prisoner, waiting in chains his
pardon on himself to set him free.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. Perception and Wishes**](#part0004.html#level-182) {#part0026_split_007.html#h1-182 .level1a}

^70^ Do you not see that all your misery comes from the strange belief
that you are powerless? Being helpless is the *cost* of sin.
Helplessness is sin's condition-the one requirement that it demands to
be believed. Only the helpless *could* believe in it. Enormity has no
appeal save to the little. And only those who first believe that they
*are* little could see attraction there. Treachery to the Son of God is
the defense of those who do not identify with him. And you are for him
or against him; either you love him or attack him, protect his unity or
see him shattered and slain by your attack.

^71^ No one believes the Son of God is powerless. And those who see
themselves as helpless *must* believe that they are not the Son of God.
What can they be *except* his enemy? And what can they do but envy him
his power and by their envy make themselves afraid of it? These are the
dark ones, silent and afraid, alone and not communicating, fearful the
power of the Son of God will strike them dead and raising up their
helplessness against him. They join the army of the powerless, to wage
their war of vengeance, bitterness, and spite on him to make him one
with them. Because they do not know that they *are* one with him, they
know not whom they hate. They are indeed a sorry army, each one as
likely to attack his brother or turn upon himself as to remember they
thought they had a common cause.

^72^ Frantic and loud and strong the dark ones seem to be. Yet they know
not their enemy, except they *hate* him. In hatred they have come
together but have not joined each other. For had they done so, hatred
would be impossible. The army of the powerless must be disbanded in the
presence of strength. Those who are strong are *never* treacherous
because they have no need to dream of power and to act out their dream.
How would an army act in dreams? Any way at all. It could be seen
attacking anyone with anything. Dreams have no reason in them. A flower
turns into a poisoned spear, a child becomes a giant, and a mouse roars
like a lion. And love is turned to hate as easily. This is no army, but
a madhouse. What seems to be a planned attack is bedlam.

^73^ The army of the powerless is weak indeed. It has no weapons, and it
has no enemy. Yes, it can overrun the world and *seek* an enemy. But it
can never find what is not there. Yes, it can *dream* it found an enemy,
but this will shift even as it attacks, so that it runs at once to find
another and never comes to rest in victory. And as it runs, it turns
against itself, thinking it caught a glimpse of the great enemy which
always eludes its murderous attack by turning into something else. How
treacherous does this enemy appear, who changes so it is impossible even
to recognize him!

^74^ Yet hate must have a target. There can be no faith in sin without
an enemy. Who that believes in sin would *dare* believe he has no enemy?
Could he admit that no one made him powerless? Reason would surely bid
him seek no longer what is not there to find. Yet first he must be
willing to perceive a world where it is not. It is not necessary that he
understand *how* he can see it. Nor should he try. For if he focuses on
what he cannot understand, he will but emphasize his helplessness and
let sin tell him that his enemy must be *himself*. But let him only ask
himself these questions, which he must decide to have it done for him:

^75^ Do I desire a world I rule instead of one which rules me?\
Do I desire a world where I am powerful instead of helpless?\
Do I desire a world in which I have no enemies and cannot sin?\
And do I want to see what I denied because it is the truth\

^76^ You have already answered the first three questions but not yet the
last. For this one still seems fearful and unlike the others. Yet reason
would assure you they *are* all the same. We said this year would
emphasize the sameness of things that *are* the same. This final
question, which is indeed the last you need decide, still seems to hold
a threat the rest have lost for you. And this imagined difference
attests to your belief that truth may be the enemy you yet may find.
Here, then, would seem to be the last remaining hope of finding sin and
not accepting power.

^77^ Forget not that the choice of truth or sin, power or helplessness,
is the choice of whether to attack or heal. For healing comes of power
and attack of helplessness. Whom you attack you *cannot* want to heal.
And whom you would have healed must be the one you chose to be
*protected* from attack. And what is this decision but the choice
whether to see him through the body's eyes or let him be revealed to you
through vision? *How* this decision leads to its effects is not your
problem. But what you *want* to see *must* be your choice. This is a
course in *cause* and not effect.

^78^ Consider carefully your answer to the last question you have left
unanswered still. And let your reason tell you that it must *be*
answered and *is* answered in the other three. And then it will be clear
to you that, as you look on the effects of sin in any form, all you need
do is simply ask yourself,

^79^ Is this what I would see? Do I want this?

^80^ This is your *one* decision; this the condition for what occurs. It
is irrelevant to *how* it happens but not to *why*. You *have* control
of this. And if you choose to see a world without an enemy in which you
are not helpless, the means to see it *will* be given you.

^81^ Why is the final question so important? Reason will tell you why.
It is the same as are the other three except in *time*. The others are
decisions which can be made and then unmade and made again. But truth is
constant and implies a state where vacillations are impossible. You can
desire a world you rule which rules you not, and change your mind. You
can desire to exchange your helplessness for power, and lose this same
desire as a little glint of sin attracts you. And you can want to see a
sinless world and let an "enemy" tempt you to use the body's eyes, and
change what you desire.

^82^ In content, all the questions *are* the same. For each one asks if
you are willing to exchange the world of sin for what the Holy Spirit
sees, since it is this the world of sin denies. And therefore those who
look on sin are seeing the denial of the real world. Yet the last
question adds the wish for *constancy* in your desire to see the real
world, so the desire becomes the *only* one you have. By answering the
final question "yes," you add sincerity to the decisions you have
already made to all the rest. For only then have you renounced the
option to change your mind again. When it is this you do *not* want, the
rest *are* wholly answered.

^83^ Why do you think you are unsure the others *have* been answered?
Could it be necessary they be asked so often, if they had? Until the
last decision has been made, the answer is both "yes" and "no." For you
have answered "yes" without perceiving that "yes" *must* mean "not no."
No one decides against his happiness, but he may do so if he does not
see he does it. And if he sees his happiness as ever changing, now this,
now that, and now an elusive shadow attached to nothing, he *does*
decide against it.

^84^ Elusive happiness, or happiness in changing form that shifts with
time and place, is an illusion which has no meaning. Happiness *mus* be
constant because it is attained by giving up the wish for the
*in*constant. Joy cannot be perceived *except* through constant vision.
And constant vision can be given only those who *wish* for constancy.
The power of the Son of God's desire remains the proof that he is wrong
who sees himself as helpless. Desire what you will, and you *will* look
on it and think it real. No thought but has the power to release or
kill. And none can leave the thinker's mind or leave him unaffected.
:::

[]{#part0026_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Inner Shift**](#part0004.html#level-183) {#part0026_split_008.html#h1-183 .level1a}

^85^ Are thoughts then dangerous? To bodies, *yes*! The thoughts that
seem to kill are those which teach the thinker that he *can* be killed.
And so he dies *because* of what he learned. He goes from life to death,
the final proof he valued the inconstant more than constancy. Surely he
*thought* he wanted happiness. Yet he did not desire it *because* it was
the truth and therefore *must* be constant.

^86^ The constancy of joy is a condition quite alien to your
understanding. Yet if you could even imagine what it must be, you would
desire it although you understand it not.

^87^ The constancy of happiness has no exceptions-no change of any kind.
It is unshakable as is the love of God for His creation. Sure in its
vision as its Creator is in what He knows, it looks on everything and
sees it is the same. It sees not the ephemeral, for it desires that
everything be like itself and sees it so. Nothing has power to confound
its constancy because its own desire cannot be shaken. It comes as
surely unto those who see the final question is necessary to the rest,
as peace must come to those who choose to heal and not to judge.

^88^ Reason will tell you that you *cannot* ask for happiness
inconstantly. For if what you desire you receive and happiness is
constant, then you need ask for it but *once* to have it *always*. And
if you do not have it always, being what it is, you did not ask for it.
For no one fails to ask for his desire of something he believes holds
out some promise of the power of giving it. He may be wrong in what he
asks, where, and of what. Yet he *will* ask because desire is a request,
an asking for, and made by one whom God Himself will never fail to
answer. God has already given him all that he *really* wants. Yet what
he is uncertain of, God *cannot* give. For he does not desire it while
he remains uncertain, and God's giving must be incomplete unless it is
received.

^89^ You who complete God's Will and are His happiness, whose will is
powerful as His, a power that is not lost in your illusions, think
carefully why it should be you have not yet decided how you would answer
the final question. Your answer to the others has made it possible to
help you be but partially insane. And yet it is the final one that
really asks if you are willing to be *wholly* sane.

^90^ What is the holy instant but God's appeal to you to recognize what
He has given you? Here is the great appeal to reason; the awareness of
what is always there to see, the happiness that could be always yours.
Here is the constant peace you could experience forever. Here is what
denial has denied *revealed* to you. For here the final question is
*already* answered and what you ask for given. Here is the future *now*,
for time is powerless because of your desire for what will never change.
For you have asked that nothing stand between the holiness of your
relationship and your *awareness* of its holiness.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 22**](#part0004.html#chap-22) {#part0027_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Salvation and the Holy Relationship**](#part0004.html#chap-22) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-184) {#part0027_split_000.html#h1-184 .level1a1}

^22:1^ Take pity on yourselves, so long enslaved. Rejoice whom God hath
joined have come together and need no longer look on sin apart. No two
can look on sin together, for they could never see it in the same place
and time. Sin is a strictly individual perception, seen in the other yet
believed by each to be within himself. And each one seems to make a
different error, and one the other cannot understand. Brothers, it *is*
the same, made by the same, and forgiven for its maker in the same way.

^22:2^ The holiness of your relationship forgives you both, undoing the
effects of what you both believed and saw. And with their going is the
*need* for sin gone with them. Who has need for sin? Only the lonely and
alone who see their brothers different from themselves. It is this
difference, seen but not real, that makes the need for sin, not real but
seen, seem justified. And all this would be real if sin were so. For an
unholy relationship is based on differences, where each one thinks the
other has what he has not. They come together, each to complete himself
and rob the other. They stay until they think there's nothing left to
steal and then move on. And so they wander through a world of strangers
unlike themselves, living with their bodies perhaps under a common roof
that shelters neither-in the same room and yet a world apart.

^3^ A holy relationship starts from a different premise. Each one has
looked within and seen no lack. Accepting his completion, he would
extend it by joining with another, whole as himself. He sees no
difference between these selves, for differences are only of the body.
Therefore, he looks on nothing he would take. He denies not his own
reality, *because* it is the truth. Just under Heaven does he stand, but
close enough not to return to earth. For this relationship has Heaven's
holiness. How far from home can a relationship so like to Heaven be?

^4^ Think what a holy relationship can teach! Here is belief in
differences undone. Here is the faith in differences shifted to
sameness. \[And here is sight of differences transformed to *vision*.\]
And reason now can lead you to the logical conclusion of your union. It
must extend, as you extended when you joined. It must reach out beyond
itself, as you reached out beyond the body to *let* yourselves be
joined. And now the sameness which you saw extends and finally removes
all sense of differences so that the sameness that lies beneath them all
becomes apparent. Here is the golden circle where you recognize the Son
of God. For what is born into a holy relationship can *never* end.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Message of the Holy Relationship**](#part0004.html#level-185) {#part0027_split_001.html#h1-185 .level1a}

^5^ Let reason take another step. If you attack whom God would heal and
hate the one He loves, then you and your Creator *have* a different
will. Yet if you *are* his Will, what you must then believe is that you
are not *yourself*. You can indeed believe this, and you *do*. And you
*have* faith in this and see much evidence on its behalf. And where, you
wonder, does your strange uneasiness, your sense of being disconnected,
and your haunting fear of lack of meaning in yourself arise? It is as
though you wandered in without a plan of any kind except to wander off,
for only that seems certain.

^6^ Yet we have heard a very similar description earlier, but it was not
of *you*. And yet this strange idea, which it *does* accurately
describe, you *think* is you. Reason would tell you that the world you
see through eyes which are not yours *must* make no sense to you. To
whom would vision such as this send back its messages? Surely not you,
whose sight is wholly independent of the eyes which look upon the world.
If this is not your vision, what can it show to you? The brain cannot
interpret what *your* vision sees. This you would understand. The brain
interprets to the body, of which it is a part. But what it says, *you*
cannot understand. Yet you have listened to it. And long and hard you
tried to understand its messages. You did not realize it is impossible
to understand what fails entirely to reach you.

^7^ You have received no messages at all you understand. For you have
listened to what can never communicate at all. Think, then, what
happened. Denying what you are and firm in faith that you are something
else, this "something else" which you have made to be yourself *became*
your sight. Yet it must be the "something else" which sees, and as *not*
you, *explains* its sight to you. *Your* vision would, of course, render
this quite unnecessary. Yet if your eyes are closed and you have called
upon this thing to lead you, asking it to explain to you the world it
sees, you have no reason not to listen nor to suspect that what it tells
you is not true. Reason would tell you it cannot be true *because* you
do not understand it. God has no secrets. He does not lead you through a
world of misery, waiting to tell you at the journey's end why He did
this to you.

^8^ What could be secret from God's Will? Yet you believe that *you*
have secrets. What could your secrets be except *another* will that is
your own, apart from His? Reason would tell you that this is no secret
that need be hidden as a sin. But a mistake indeed! Let not your fear of
sin protect it from correction, for the attraction of guilt is only
fear. Here is the one emotion that you made, whatever it may seem to be.
This is the emotion of secrecy, of private thoughts, and of the body.
This is the one emotion that opposes love and always leads to sight of
differences and loss of sameness. Here is the one emotion that keeps you
blind, dependent on the self you think you made to lead you through the
world it made for you.

^9^ Your sight was given you, along with everything that you can
understand. You will perceive no difficulty in understanding what this
vision tells you, for everyone sees only what he thinks he *is*. And
what your sight would show you, you will understand *because* it is the
truth. Only your vision can convey to you what *you* can see. It reaches
you directly without a need to be interpreted to you. What needs
interpretation *must* be alien. Nor will it ever be made understandable
by an interpreter you cannot understand.

^10^ Of all the messages you have received and failed to understand,
this course alone is *open* to your understanding and *can* be
understood. This is *your* language. You do not understand it yet, only
because your whole communication is like a baby's. The sounds a baby
makes and what he hears are highly unreliable, meaning different things
to him at different times. Neither the sounds he hears nor sights he
sees are stable yet. But what he hears and does not understand will be
his native tongue, through which he will communicate with those around
him, and they with him. And the strange, shifting ones he sees about him
will become to him his comforters, and he will recognize his home and
see them there with him.

^11^ So in each holy relationship is the ability to communicate instead
of separate reborn. Yet a holy relationship, so recently reborn itself
from an unholy relationship and yet more ancient than the old illusion
that it has replaced, *is* like a baby now in its rebirth. Yet in this
infant is your vision returned to you, and he will speak the language
both of you can understand. He is not nurtured by the "something else"
you thought was you. He was not given there, nor was received by
anything except yourself. For no two people can unite except through
Christ, Whose vision sees them one.

^12^ Think what is given you, my holy brothers. This child will teach
you what you do not understand and make it plain. For his will be no
alien tongue. He will need no interpreter to you, for it was you who
taught him what he knows *because* you knew it. He could not come to
anyone but you, never to "something else." Where Christ has entered, no
one is alone, for never could He find a home in separate ones. Yet must
He be reborn into His ancient home, so seeming new and yet as old as He,
a tiny newcomer, dependent on the holiness of your relationship to let
Him live.

^13^ Be certain God did not entrust His Son to the unworthy. Nothing but
what is part of Him is worthy of being joined. Nor is it possible that
anything not part of Him *can* join. Communication must have been
restored to those that join, for this they could not do through bodies.
What, then, has joined them? Reason will tell you that they must have
seen each other through a vision not of the body and communicated in a
language the body does not speak. Nor could it be a fearful sight or
sound that drew them gently into one. Rather, in each the other saw a
perfect shelter where his Self could be reborn in safety and in peace.
Such did his reason tell him; such he believed *because* it was the
truth.

^14^ Here is the first direct perception that you have made. You made it
through awareness older than perception and yet reborn in just an
instant. For what is time to what was always so? Think what that instant
brought-the recognition that the "something else" you thought was you is
an illusion. And truth came instantly to show you where your Self must
be. It is *denial* of illusions that calls on truth, for to deny
illusions is to recognize that fear is meaningless. Into the holy home,
where fear is powerless, love enters thankfully, grateful that it is one
with you who joined to let it enter.

^15^ Christ comes to what is like Himself; the same, not different. For
He is always drawn unto Himself. What is as like Him as a holy
relationship? And what draws you together draws Him to you. Here are His
sweetness and His gentle innocence protected from attack. And here can
He return in confidence, for faith in one another is always faith in
Him. You are indeed correct in looking on each other as His chosen home,
for here you will with Him and with His Father. This is your Father's
Will for you, and yours with His. And who is drawn to Christ is drawn to
God as surely as both are drawn to every holy relationship, the home
prepared for them as earth is turned to Heaven.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Your Brother's Sinlessness**](#part0004.html#level-186) {#part0027_split_002.html#h1-186 .level1a}

^16^ The opposite of illusions is not disillusionment, but truth. Only
to the ego, to which truth is meaningless, do they appear to be the only
alternatives and different from each other. In truth they are the same.
Both bring the same amount of misery, though each one seems to be the
way to lose the misery the other brings. Every illusion carries pain and
suffering in the dark folds of the heavy garments with which it hides
its nothingness. Yet in these dark and heavy garments are those who seek
illusions covered and hidden from the joy of truth.

^17^ Truth is the opposite of illusions because it offers joy. What else
but joy could be the opposite of misery? To leave one kind of misery and
seek another is hardly an escape. To change illusions is to make no
change. The search for joy in misery is senseless, for how could joy be
found in misery? All that is possible in the dark world of misery is to
select some aspects out of it, see them as different, and define the
difference as joy. Yet to perceive a difference where none exists will
surely fail to *make* a difference.

^18^ Illusions carry only guilt and suffering, sickness and death to
their believers. The form in which they are accepted is irrelevant. No
form of misery in reason's eyes can be confused with joy. Joy is
eternal. You can be sure indeed that any seeming happiness that does not
last is really fear. Joy does not turn to sorrow, for the eternal cannot
change. But sorrow *can* be turned to joy, for time gives way to the
eternal. Only the timeless must remain unchanged, but everything in time
can change with time. Yet if the change be real and not imagined,
illusions must give way to truth and not to other dreams that are but
equally unreal. This is no difference.

^19^ Reason will tell you that the only way to escape from misery is to
recognize it *and go the other way*. Truth is the same and misery the
same, but they *are* different from each other in every way, in every
instance, and without exception. To believe that one exception can exist
is to confuse what is the same with what is different. *One* illusion
cherished and defended against the truth makes *all* truth meaningless
and *all* illusions real. Such is the power of belief. It cannot
compromise. And faith in innocence is faith in sin if the belief
excludes one living thing and holds it out apart from its forgiveness.

^20^ Both reason and the ego will tell you this, but what they *make* of
it is not the same. The ego will assure you now that it is impossible
for you to see no guilt in anyone. And if this vision is the *only*
means by which escape from guilt can be attained, then the belief in sin
must be eternal. Yet reason looks on this another way, for reason sees
the *source* of an idea as what will make it true or false. This must be
so if the idea is *like* its source. Therefore, says reason, if escape
from guilt was given to the Holy Spirit as His purpose, and by One to
Whom nothing He wills *can* be impossible, the means for its attainment
are *more* than possible. They *must* be there, and you must *have*
them.

^21^ This is a crucial period in this course, for here the separation of
you and the ego must be made complete. For if you *have* the means to
let the Holy Spirit's purpose be accomplished, they can be *used*. And
*through* their use will you gain faith in them. Yet to the ego this
must be impossible, and no one undertakes to do what holds no hope of
ever being done. *You* know what your Creator wills is possible, but
what you made believes it is not so. Now must you choose between
yourself and an *illusion* of yourself. *Not* both, but *one*. There is
no point in trying to avoid this one decision. It *must* be made. Faith
and belief can fall to either side, but reason tells you that misery
lies only on one side and joy upon the other.

^22^ Forsake not now each other. For you who are the same will not
decide alone nor differently. Either you give each other life or death;
either you are each other's savior or his judge, offering him sanctuary
or condemnation. This course will be believed entirely or not at all.
For it is wholly true or wholly false and cannot be but partially
believed. And you will either escape from misery entirely or not at all.
Reason will tell you that there is no middle ground where you can pause
uncertainly, waiting to choose between the joy of Heaven and the misery
of hell. Until you choose Heaven, you *are* in hell and misery.

^23^ There is no part of Heaven you can take and weave into illusions.
Nor is there one illusion you can enter Heaven with. A savior cannot be
a judge, nor mercy condemnation. And vision cannot damn, but only bless.
Whose function is to save will save. *How* he will do it is beyond your
understanding, but *when* must be your choice. For time you made, and
time you *can* command. You are no more a slave to time than to the
world you made.

^24^ Let us look closer at the whole illusion that what you made has
power to enslave its maker. This is the same belief that caused the
separation. It is the meaningless idea that thoughts can leave the
thinker's mind, be different from it, and *in* opposition to it. If this
were true, thoughts would not be the mind's extensions but its enemies.
And here we see again another form of the same fundamental illusion we
have seen many times before. Only if it were possible the Son of God
could leave his Father's Mind, make himself different, and oppose His
Will, would it be possible that the self he made and all it made should
be his master.

^25^ Behold the great projection, but look on it with the decision that
it must be healed and not with fear. Nothing you made has any power over
you unless you still would be apart from your Creator and with a will
opposed to His. For only if you would believe His Son could be His enemy
does it seem possible that what *you* made is yours. You would condemn
His joy to misery and make Him different. And all the misery *you* made
has been your own. Are you not *glad* to learn it is not true? Is it not
welcome news to hear not one of the illusions that you made replaced the
truth?

^26^ Only *your* thoughts have been impossible. Salvation *cannot* be.
It *is* impossible to look upon your savior as your enemy and recognize
him. Yet it *is* possible to recognize him for what he is if God would
have it so. What God has given to your holy relationship is *there*. For
what He gave the Holy Spirit to give to you, *He gave*. Would you not
look upon the savior that has been given you? And would you not exchange
in gratitude the function of an executioner you gave him for the one he
has in truth? Receive of him what God has given him for you, not what
you tried to give yourself.

^27^ Beyond the bodies that you interposed between you and shining in
the golden light which reaches it from the bright endless circle that
extends forever is your holy relationship, beloved of God Himself. How
still it rests, in time and yet beyond, immortal yet on earth. How great
the power that lies in it. Time waits upon its will, and earth will be
as it would have it be. Here is no separate will nor the desire that
*anything* be separate. Its will has no exceptions, and what it wills is
true. Every illusion brought to its forgiveness is gently overlooked and
disappears. For at its center Christ has been reborn to light His home
with vision that overlooks the world. Would you not have this holy home
be yours as well? No misery is here, but only joy.

^28^ All you need do to dwell in quiet here with Christ is share His
vision. Quickly and gladly is His vision given to anyone who is but
willing to see his brother sinless. And no one can remain beyond this
willingness if you would be released entirely from all effects of sin.
Would you have partial forgiveness for yourself? Can you reach Heaven
while a single sin still tempts you to remain in misery? Heaven is the
home of perfect purity, and God created it for *you*. Look on your holy
brother, sinless as yourself, and let him lead you there.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Reason and the Holy Relationship**](#part0004.html#level-187) {#part0027_split_003.html#h1-187 .level1a}

^29^ The introduction of reason into the ego's thought system is the
beginning of its undoing. For reason and the ego are contradictory. Nor
is it possible for them to co-exist in your awareness. And reason's goal
is to make plain and therefore obvious. You can *see* reason. This is
not a play on words, for here is the beginning of a vision that has
meaning. Vision is sense, quite literally. If it is not the body's
sight, it *must* be understood. For it is *plain*, and what is obvious
is not ambiguous. It *can* be understood. And here do reason and the ego
separate to go their different ways.

^30^ The ego's whole continuance depends on its belief you cannot learn
this course. Share this belief, and reason will be unable to see your
errors and make way for their correction. For reason sees *through*
errors, telling you what you thought was real is not. Reason can see the
difference between sin and mistakes because it *wants* correction.
Therefore, it tells you what you thought was uncorrectable *can* be
corrected, and thus it must have been an error. The ego's opposition to
correction leads to its fixed belief in sin and disregard of errors. It
looks on *nothing* that can be corrected. Thus does the ego damn and
reason save.

^31^ Reason is not salvation in itself, but it makes way for peace and
brings you to a state of mind in which salvation can be given you. Sin
is a block, set like a heavy gate, locked and without a key, across the
road to peace. No one who looks on it without the help of reason would
try to pass it. The body's eyes behold it as solid granite, so thick it
would be madness to attempt to pass it. Yet reason sees through it
easily *because* it is an error. The form it takes cannot conceal its
emptiness from reason's eyes.

^32^ *Only* the form of error attracts the ego. Meaning it does not
recognize and does not know if it is there or not. Everything which the
body's eyes can see is a mistake, an error in perception, a distorted
fragment of the whole, without the meaning that the whole would give.
And yet mistakes, regardless of their form, can be corrected. Sin is but
error in a special form the ego venerates. It would preserve all errors
and make them sins. For here is its own stability, its heavy anchor in
the shifting world it made-the rock on which its church is built and
where its worshipers are bound to bodies and believe the body's freedom
is their own.

^33^ Reason will tell you that the form of error is not what makes it a
mistake. If what the form *conceals* is a mistake, the form cannot
prevent correction. The body's eyes see *only* form. They cannot see
beyond what they were *made* to see. And they were made to look on error
and not see past it. Theirs is indeed a strange perception, for they can
see only illusions, unable to look beyond the granite block of sin and
stopping at the outside form of nothing. To this distorted form of
vision, the outside of everything, the wall that stands between you and
the truth, is wholly true. Yet how can sight which stops at nothingness
as if it were a solid wall see truly? It is held back by form, having
been made to guarantee that nothing else but form will be perceived.

^34^ These eyes, made *not* to see, will *never* see. For the idea they
represent left not its maker, and it is their maker that sees through
them. What was its maker's *goal* but not to see? For this the body's
eyes are perfect means, but not for *seeing*. See how the body's eyes
rest on externals and cannot go beyond. Watch how they stop at
nothingness, unable to go beyond the form to meaning. Nothing's so
blinding as perception of form. For sight of form means understanding
has been obscured.

^35^ Only *mistakes* have different forms, and so they can deceive. You
can change form *because* it is not true. It could not be reality
*because* it can be changed. Reason will tell you that, if form is not
reality, it must be an illusion and is not *there* to see. And if you
see it, you must be mistaken, for you are seeing what can *not* be real
as if it *were*. What cannot see beyond what is not there *must* be
distorted perception and must perceive illusions as the truth. Could it
then *recognize* the truth?

^36^ Let not the *form* of his mistakes keep you from him whose holiness
is yours. Let not the vision of his holiness, the sight of which would
show you your forgiveness, be kept from you by what the body's eyes can
see. Let your awareness of your brother not be blocked by your
perception of his sins and of his body. What is there in him that you
would attack except what you associate with his body, which *you*
believe can sin? Beyond his errors is *his* holiness and *your*
salvation. You gave him not his holiness but tried to see your sins in
him to save yourself. And yet his holiness *is* your forgiveness. Can
*you* be saved by making sinful the one whose holiness is your
salvation?

^37^ A holy relationship, however newly born, must value holiness above
all else. Unholy values will produce confusion, and in *awareness*. In
an unholy relationship, each one is valued because he seems to justify
the other's sin. He sees within the other what impels him to sin against
his will. And thus he lays his sins upon the other and is attracted to
him to *perpetuate* his sins. And so it must become impossible for each
to see himself as *causing* sin by his desire to have sin real. Yet
reason sees a holy relationship as what it is-a common state of mind,
where both give errors gladly to correction that both may happily be
healed as one.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Branching of the Road**](#part0004.html#level-188) {#part0027_split_004.html#h1-188 .level1a}

^38^ When you come to the place where the branch in the road is quite
apparent, you cannot go ahead. You *must* go either one way or the
other. For now if you go straight ahead, the way you went before you
reached the branch, you will go *nowhere*. The whole purpose of coming
this far was to decide which branch you will take *now*. The way you
came no longer matters. It can no longer serve. No one who reaches this
far *can* make the wrong decision, but he *can* delay. And there is no
part of the journey that seems more hopeless and futile than standing
where the road branches and not deciding on which way to go.

^39^ It is but the first few steps along the right way that seem hard,
for you *have* chosen, although you still may think you can go back and
make the other choice. This is not so. A choice made with the power of
Heaven to uphold it cannot *be* undone. Your way *is* decided. There
will be nothing you will not be told if you acknowledge this.

^40^ And so you stand, here in this holy place, before the veil of sin
that hangs between you and the face of Christ. *Let* it be lifted! Raise
it together, for it is but a veil that stands between you. Either alone
will see it as a solid block, nor realize how thin the drapery that
separates you now. Yet it is almost over in your awareness, and peace
has reached you even here before the veil. Think what will happen after!
The love of Christ will light your faces and shine from them into a
darkened world that *needs* the light. And from this holy place He will
return with you, not leaving it nor you. You will become His messengers,
returning Him unto Himself.

^41^ Think of the loveliness that you will see who walk with Him! And
think how beautiful will each of you look to the other! How happy you
will be to be together after such a long and lonely journey where you
walked alone. The gates of Heaven, open now for you, will you now open
to the sorrowful. And none who looks upon the Christ in you but will
rejoice. How beautiful the sight you saw beyond the veil which you will
bring to light the tired eyes of those as weary now as once you were.
How thankful will they be to see you come among them, offering Christ's
forgiveness to dispel their faith in sin.

^42^ Every mistake you make the other will gently have corrected for
you, for in his sight your loveliness is his salvation which he would
protect from harm. And each will be the other's strong protector from
everything that seems to rise between you. So shall you walk the world
with me, whose message has not yet been given to everyone. For you are
here to let it be *received*. God's offer still is open, yet it waits
acceptance. From you who have accepted it is it received. Into your
joined hands is it safely given, for you who share it have become its
willing guardians and protectors.

^43^ To all who share the love of God, the grace is given to be the
givers of what they have received. And so they learn that it is theirs
forever. All barriers disappear before their coming, as every obstacle
was finally surmounted which seemed to rise and block their way before.
This veil you lift together opens the way to truth to more than you.
Those who would let illusions be lifted from their minds are this
world's saviors, walking the world with their Redeemer and carrying His
message of hope and freedom and release from suffering to everyone who
needs a miracle to save him.

^44^ How easy is it to offer this miracle to everyone! No one who has
received it for himself could find it difficult. For by receiving it, he
learned it was not given him alone. Such is the function of a holy
relationship-to receive together and give as you received. Standing
before the veil, it still seems difficult. But hold out your joined
hands and touch this heavy-seeming block, and you will learn how easily
your fingers slip through its nothingness. It is no solid wall. And only
an illusion stands between you and the holy Self you share.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Weakness and Defensiveness**](#part0004.html#level-189) {#part0027_split_005.html#h1-189 .level1a}

^45^ How does one overcome illusions? Surely not by force or anger nor
by opposing them in any way. Merely by letting reason tell you that they
*contradict* reality. They go against what must be true. The opposition
comes from them and not reality. Reality opposes nothing. What merely
*is* needs no defense and offers none. Only illusions need defense
because of weakness. And how can it be difficult to walk the way of
truth when only weakness interferes? *You* are the strong ones in this
seeming conflict. And you need no defense. Everything that needs defense
you do not want, for anything that needs defense will *weaken* you.

^46^ Consider what the ego wants defenses *for*-always to justify what
goes against the truth, flies in the face of reason, and makes no sense.
Can this *be* justified? What can this be except an invitation to
insanity to save you from the truth? And what would you be saved from
but what you fear? Belief in sin needs great defense and at enormous
cost. All that the Holy Spirit offers must be defended against and
sacrificed. For sin is carved into a block out of your peace and laid
between you and its return. Yet how can peace be so fragmented? It is
still whole, and nothing has been taken from it.

^47^ See how the means and the material of evil dreams are nothing. In
truth you stand together with nothing in between. God holds your hands,
and what can separate whom He has joined as one with Him? It is your
Father Whom you would defend against. Yet it remains impossible to keep
love out. God rests with you in quiet, undefended and wholly
undefending, for in this quiet state alone is strength and power. Here
can no weakness enter, for here is no attack and therefore no illusions.
Love rests in certainty. Only uncertainty can be defensive. And all
uncertainty is doubt about *yourself*.

^48^ How weak is fear-how little and how meaningless! How insignificant
before the quiet strength of those whom love has joined! This is your
"enemy"-a frightened mouse that would attack the universe. How likely is
it that it will succeed? Can it be difficult to disregard its feeble
squeaks that tell of its omnipotence and would drown out the hymn of
praise to its Creator which every heart throughout the universe forever
sings as one? Which is the stronger? Is it this tiny mouse or everything
that God created? You are not joined together by this mouse but by the
Will of God. And can a mouse betray whom God has joined?

^49^ If you but recognized how little stands between you and your
awareness of your union! Be not deceived by the illusions it presents of
size and thickness, weight, solidity, and firmness of foundation. Yes,
to the body's eyes it looks like an enormous solid body, immovable as is
a mountain. Yet within you there is a Force which no illusions can
resist. This body only seems to be immovable; this Force is irresistible
in truth. What, then, must happen when they come together? Can the
illusion of immovability be long defended from what is quietly passed
through and gone beyond?

^50^ Forget not, when you feel the need arise to be defensive about
anything, you have identified yourself with an illusion. And therefore
feel that you are weak because you are alone. This is the cost of *all*
illusions. Not one but rests on the belief that you are separate. Not
one that does not seem to stand, heavy and solid and immovable, between
you and your brother. And not one that truth cannot pass over lightly
and so easily that you must be convinced, in spite of what you thought
it was, that it is nothing. If you forgive each other, this *must*
happen. For it is your unwillingness to overlook what seems to stand
between you that makes it look impenetrable and defends the illusion of
its immovability.
:::

[]{#part0027_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Freedom and the Holy Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-190) {#part0027_split_006.html#h1-190 .level1a}

^51^ Do you want freedom of the body or of the mind? For both you cannot
have. Which do you value? Which is your goal? For one you see as means;
the other, end. And one must serve the other and lead to its
predominance, increasing its importance by diminishing its own. Means
serve the end, and as the end is reached, the value of the means
decreases, eclipsed entirely when they are recognized as functionless.
No one but yearns for freedom and tries to find it. Yet he will seek for
it where he believes it is and can be found. He will believe it possible
of mind or body, and he will make the other serve his choice as means to
find it.

^52^ Where freedom of the body has been chosen, the mind is used as
means whose value lies in its ability to contrive ways to achieve the
body's freedom. Yet freedom of the body has no meaning, and so the mind
is dedicated to serve illusions. This is a situation so contradictory
and so impossible that anyone who chooses this has no idea of what *is*
valuable. Yet even in this confusion, so profound it cannot be
described, the Holy Spirit waits in gentle patience, as certain of the
outcome as He is sure of His Creator's love. He knows this mad decision
was made by one as dear to His Creator as love is to itself.

^53^ Be not disturbed at all to think how He can change the role of
means and end so easily in what God loves and would have free forever.
But be you rather grateful that *you* can be the means to serve His end.
This is the only service which leads to freedom. To serve this end, the
body must be perceived as sinless because the *goal* is sinlessness. The
lack of contradiction makes the soft transition from means to end as
easy as is the shift from hate to gratitude before forgiving eyes. You
*will* be sanctified by one another, using your bodies only to serve the
sinless. And it *will* be impossible for you to hate what serves what
you would heal.

^54^ This holy relationship, lovely in its innocence, mighty in
strength, and blazing with a light far brighter than the sun which
lights the sky you see, is chosen of your Father as a means for His own
plan. Be thankful that it serves yours not at all. Nothing entrusted to
it can be misused, and nothing given it but will be used. This holy
relationship has the power to heal all pain, regardless of its form.
Neither of you alone can serve at all. Only in your joint will does
healing lie. For here *your* healing is and here will you accept
Atonement. And in your healing is the Sonship healed *because* your
wills are joined.

^55^ Before a holy relationship there is no sin. The form of error is no
longer seen, and reason, joined with love, looks quietly on all
confusion, observing merely, "This was a mistake." And then the same
Atonement you accepted in your relationship corrects the error and lays
a part of Heaven in its place. How blessed are you who let this gift be
given! Each part of Heaven that you bring is given *you*. And every
empty place in Heaven that you fill again with the Eternal Light you
bring shines now on *you*. The means of sinlessness can know no fear
because they carry only love with them.

^56^ Children of peace, the light *has* come to you. The light you bring
you do not recognize, and yet you will remember. Who can deny himself
the vision that he brings to others? And who would fail to recognize a
gift he let be laid in Heaven through himself? The gentle service that
you give the Holy Spirit is service to yourself. You who are now His
means must love all that He loves. And what you bring is your
remembrance of everything that is eternal. No trace of anything in time
can long remain in minds that serve the timeless. And no illusion can
disturb the peace of a relationship which has become the means of peace.

^57^ When you have looked upon each other with complete forgiveness from
which no error is excluded and nothing kept hidden what mistake can
there be anywhere you cannot overlook? What form of suffering could
block your sight, preventing you from seeing past it? And what illusion
could there be you will not recognize as a mistake-a shadow through
which you walk completely undismayed? God would let nothing interfere
with those whose wills are His\[. And they will recognize their wills
are His, *because* they serve His Will\] and serve it willingly. And
*could* remembrance of what they are be long delayed?

^58^ You will see your value through each other's eyes, and each one is
released as he beholds his savior in place of the attacker who he
thought was there. Through this releasing is the world released. This is
your part in bringing peace. For you have asked what is your function
here and have been answered. Seek not to change it nor to substitute
another goal. \[This one was *given* you and *only* this.\] Accept this
one and serve it willingly, for what the Holy Spirit does with the gifts
you give each other, to whom He offers them, and where and when is up to
Him. He will bestow them where they are received and welcomed. He will
use every one of them for peace. Nor will one little smile or
willingness to overlook the tiniest mistake be lost to anyone.

^59^ What can it be but universal blessing to look on what your Father
loves with charity? Extension of forgiveness is the Holy Spirit's
function. Leave this to Him. Let your concern be only that you give to
Him that which can *be* extended. Save no dark secrets that He cannot
use, but offer Him the tiny gifts He can extend forever. He will take
each one and make of it a potent force for peace. He will withhold no
blessing from it nor limit it in any way. He will join to it all the
power that God has given Him to make each little gift of love a source
of healing for everyone. Each little gift you offer to the other lights
up the world. Be not concerned with darkness; look away from it and
toward each other. And let the darkness be dispelled by Him Who knows
the light and lays it gently in each quiet smile of faith and confidence
with which you bless each other.

^60^ On your learning depends the welfare of the world. And it is only
arrogance that would deny the power of your will. Think you the Will of
God is powerless? Is this humility? You do not see what this belief has
done. You see yourself as vulnerable, frail, and easily destroyed and at
the mercy of countless attackers more powerful than you. Let us look
straight at how this error came about, for here lies buried the heavy
anchor that seems to keep the fear of God in place, unmovable and solid
as a rock. While this remains, so will it seem to be.

^61^ Who can attack the Son of God and *not* attack his Father? How can
God's Son be weak and frail and easily destroyed *unless* his Father is?
You do not see that every sin and every condemnation which you perceive
and justify *is* an attack upon your Father. And that is why it has not
happened nor *could* be real. You do not see that this is your attempt
because you think the Father and the Son are separate. And you *must*
think that they are separate because of fear. For it seems safer to
attack another or yourself than to attack the great Creator of the
universe, whose power you *know*.

^62^ If you were one with God and *recognized* this oneness, you would
know His power is *yours*. But you will not remember this while you
believe attack of any kind means anything. It is unjustified in any form
*because* it has no meaning. The only way it could be justified is if
each one of you were separate from the other, and all were separate from
your Creator. For only then would it be possible to attack a part of the
creation without the whole, the Son without the Father, and to attack
another without yourself or hurt yourself without the other feeling
pain. And this belief you *want*. Yet wherein lies its value except in
the desire to attack in safety? Attack is neither safe nor dangerous. It
is *impossible*. And this is so *because* the universe is one. You would
not choose attack on its reality if it were not essential to attack to
see it separated from its maker. And thus it seems as if love could
attack and become fearful.

^63^ Only the *different* can attack. So you conclude *because* you can
attack you *must* be different. Yet does the Holy Spirit explain this
differently. *Because* you are not different, you *cannot* attack.
Either position is a logical conclusion if only the different can
attack. Either could be maintained, but never both. The only question to
be answered to decide which must be true is whether you *are* different.
From the position of what you understand, you seem to be and therefore
can attack. Of the alternatives, this seems more natural and more in
line with your experience. And therefore it is necessary that you have
other experiences more in line with truth to teach you what *is* natural
and true.

^64^ This is the function of your holy relationship. For what one thinks
the other will experience with him. What can this mean *except* your
minds are one? Look not with fear upon this happy fact and think not
that it lays a heavy burden on you. For when you have accepted it with
gladness, you will realize that your relationship is a reflection of the
union of the Creator and His Son. From loving minds there *is* no
separation. And every thought in one brings gladness to the other
*because* they are the same. Joy is unlimited because each shining
thought of love extends its being and creates more of itself. There is
no difference anywhere in it, for every thought is like itself.

^65^ The light that joins you shines throughout the universe, and
because it joins you, so it makes you one with your Creator. And in Him
is all creation joined. Would you regret you cannot fear alone when your
relationship can also teach the power of love is there, which makes all
fear impossible? Do not attempt to keep a little of the ego with this
gift. For it was given you to be *used* and not obscured. What teaches
you you cannot separate, *denies* the ego. Let truth decide if you be
different or the same and teach you which *is* true.
:::

[]{#part0028_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 23**](#part0004.html#chap-23) {#part0028_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The War Against Yourself**](#part0004.html#chap-23) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-191) {#part0028_split_000.html#h1-191 .level1a1}

^23:1^ Do you not see the opposite of frailty and weakness is
sinlessness? Innocence is strength, and nothing else is strong. The
sinless cannot fear, for sin of any kind is weakness. The show of
strength attack would use to cover frailty conceals it not, for how can
the unreal be hidden? No one is strong who has an enemy, and no one can
attack unless he thinks he has. Belief in enemies is therefore the
belief in weakness, and what is weak is *not* the Will of God. Being
opposed to it, it is its "enemy." And God is feared as an *opposing*
will.

^2^ How strange indeed becomes this war against yourself! You will
believe that everything you use for sin can hurt you and become your
enemy. And you will fight against it and try to weaken it because of
this; and you will think that you succeeded and attack again. It is as
certain you will fear what you attack as it is sure that you will love
what you perceive as sinless. He walks in peace who travels sinlessly
along the way love shows him. For love walks with him there, protecting
him from fear. And he will see only the sinless, who can not attack.

^3^ Walk you in glory with your head held high, and fear no evil. The
innocent are safe because they share their innocence. Nothing they see
is harmful, for their awareness of the truth releases everything from
the illusion of harmfulness. And what seemed harmful now stands shining
in their innocence, released from sin and fear, and happily returned to
love. They share the strength of love *because* they looked on
innocence. And every error disappeared because they saw it not. Who
looks for glory finds it where it *is*. Where could it be but in the
innocent?

^4^ Let not the little interferers pull you to littleness. There *can*
be no attraction of guilt in innocence. Think what a happy world you
walk with truth beside you! Do not give up this world of freedom for a
little sigh of seeming sin nor for a tiny stirring of guilt's
attraction. Would you, for all these meaningless distractions, lay
Heaven aside? Your destiny and purpose are far beyond them in the clean
place where littleness does not exist. Your purpose is at variance with
littleness of any kind. And so it is at variance with sin.

^5^ Let us not let littleness lead God's Son into temptation. His glory
is *beyond* it, measureless and timeless as eternity. Do not let time
intrude upon your sight of him. Leave him not frightened and alone in
his temptation but help him rise above it and perceive the light of
which he is a part. Your innocence will light the way to his, and so is
yours protected and *kept* in your awareness. For who can know his glory
and perceive the little and the weak about him? Who can walk trembling
in a fearful world and realize that Heaven's glory shines on him?

^6^ Nothing around you but is part of you. Look on it lovingly, and see
the light of Heaven in it. So will you come to understand all that is
given you. In kind forgiveness will the world sparkle and shine and
everything you once thought sinful now will be reinterpreted as part of
Heaven. How beautiful it is to walk clean and redeemed and happy through
a world in bitter need of the redemption that your innocence bestows
upon it! What can you value more than this? For here is your salvation
and your freedom. And it must be complete if *you* would recognize it.
:::

[]{#part0028_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Irreconcilable Beliefs**](#part0004.html#level-192) {#part0028_split_001.html#h1-192 .level1a}

^7^ The memory of God comes to the quiet mind. It cannot come where
there is conflict, for a mind at war against itself remembers not
eternal gentleness. The means of war are not the means of peace, and
what the warlike would remember is not love. War is impossible unless
belief in victory is cherished. Conflict within you must imply that you
believe the ego has the power to *be* victorious. Why else would you
identify with it? Surely you realize the ego is at war with God. Certain
it is it has no enemy. Yet just as certain is its fixed belief it *has*
an enemy that it must overcome and *will* succeed.

^8^ Do you not realize a war against yourself would *be* a war on God?
Is victory conceivable? And if it were, is this a victory that you would
*want*? The death of God, if it were possible, would be *your* death. Is
this a *victory*? The ego *always* marches to defeat because it thinks
that triumph over you is possible. And God thinks otherwise. This is no
war-only the mad belief the Will of God can be attacked and overthrown.
You may *identify* with this belief, but never will it be more than
madness. And fear will reign in madness and will seem to have replaced
love there. This is the conflict's *purpose*. And to those who think
that it is possible, the means seem real.

^9^ Be certain that it is impossible God and the ego, or yourself and
it, will *ever* meet. You *seem* to meet and make your strange alliances
on grounds that have no meaning. For your beliefs converge upon the
body, the ego's chosen home, which you believe is *yours*. You meet at a
mistake-an error in your self-appraisal. The ego joins with an illusion
of yourself you *share* with it. And yet illusions cannot join. They are
the same, and they are nothing. Their joining lies in nothingness; two
are as meaningless as one or as a thousand. The ego joins with nothing,
*being* nothing. The victory it seeks is meaningless as is itself.

^10^ Brothers, the war against yourself is almost over. The journey's
end is at the place of peace. Would you not now accept the peace offered
you here? This "enemy" you fought as an intruder on your peace is here
transformed before your sight into the giver of your peace. Your "enemy"
was God Himself, to Whom all conflict, triumph, and attack of any kind
are all unknown. He loves you perfectly, completely, and eternally. The
Son of God at war with his Creator is a condition as ridiculous as
nature roaring at the wind in anger and proclaiming that it is part of
itself no more.

^11^ Could nature possibly establish this and make it true? Nor *is* it
up to you to say what shall be part of you and what is kept apart. The
war against yourself was undertaken to teach the Son of God that he is
not himself and *not* his Father's Son. For this, the memory of his
Father *must* be forgotten. It *is* forgotten in the body's life, and if
you think you are a body, you will believe you *have* forgotten it. Yet
truth can never be forgotten by *itself*, and you have *not* forgotten
what you are. Only a strange illusion of yourself, a wish to triumph
over what you are, remembers not.

^12^ The war against yourself is but the battle of two illusions,
struggling to make them different from each other in the belief the one
which conquers will be true. There *is* no conflict between them and the
*truth*. Nor *are* they different from each other. Both are not true.
And so it matters not what form they take. What made them is insane, and
they remain part of what made them. Madness holds out no menace to
reality and has no influence upon it. Illusions *cannot* triumph over
truth, nor can they threaten it in any way. And the reality which they
deny is not a part of them.

^13^ What *you* remember *is* a part of you. For you *must* be as God
created you. Truth does not fight against illusions, nor do illusions
fight against the truth. Illusions battle only with themselves. Being
fragmented, they fragment. But truth is indivisible and far beyond their
little reach. You will remember what you know when you have learned you
cannot *be* in conflict. One illusion about yourself can battle with
another, yet the war of two illusions is a state where *nothing*
happens. There is no victor, and there is no victory. And truth stands
radiant, apart from conflict, untouched and quiet in the peace of God.

^14^ Conflict must be between *two* forces. It cannot exist between one
power and nothingness. There is nothing you could attack that is not
part of you. And *by* attacking it, you make two illusions of yourself
in conflict with each other. And this occurs whenever you look on
anything that God created with anything but love. Conflict is fearful,
for it is the *birth* of fear. Yet what is born of nothing cannot win
reality through battle. Why would you fill your world with conflicts
with yourself? Let all this madness be undone for you and turn in peace
to the remembrance of God, still shining in your quiet mind.

^15^ See how the conflict of illusions disappears when it is brought to
truth! For it seems real only as long as it is seen as war between
conflicting *truths*, the conqueror to be the truer, the more real, and
vanquisher of the illusion that was less real, made an illusion by
defeat. Thus, conflict is the choice *between* illusions, one to be
crowned as real, the other vanquished and despised. Here will the Father
*never* be remembered. Yet no illusion can invade His home and drive Him
out of what He loves forever. And what He loves must be forever quiet
and at peace *because* it is His home. And you who are beloved of Him
are no illusions, being as true and holy as Himself.

^16^ The stillness of your certainty of Him and of yourself is home to
both of you, who dwell as one and not apart. Open the door of His most
holy home and let forgiveness sweep away all trace of the belief in sin
that keeps God homeless and His Son with Him. You are not strangers in
the house of God. Welcome your brother to the home where God has set him
in serenity and peace and dwells with him. Illusions have no place where
love abides, protecting you from everything that is not true. You dwell
in peace as limitless as its Creator, and everything is given those who
would remember Him. Over His home the Holy Spirit watches, sure that its
peace can never be disturbed.

^17^ How can the resting-place of God turn on itself and seek to
overcome the One Who dwells there? And think what happens when the house
of God perceives itself divided. The altar disappears, the light grows
dim, the temple of the Holy One becomes a house of sin. And nothing is
remembered except illusions. Illusions can conflict because their forms
are different. And they do battle only to establish which form is true.

^18^ Illusion meets illusion; truth, itself. The meeting of illusions
leads to war. Peace, looking on itself, extends itself. War is the
condition in which fear is born and grows and seeks to dominate. Peace
is the state where love abides and seeks to share itself. Conflict and
peace are opposites. Where one abides the other cannot be; where either
goes the other disappears. So is the memory of God obscured in minds
that have become illusion's battleground. Yet far beyond this senseless
war it shines, ready to be remembered when you side with peace.
:::

[]{#part0028_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Laws of Chaos**](#part0004.html#level-193) {#part0028_split_002.html#h1-193 .level1a}

^19^ The "laws" of chaos can be brought to light, though never
understood. Chaotic laws are hardly meaningful and therefore out of
reason's sphere. Yet they appear to constitute an obstacle to reason and
to truth. Let us, then, look upon them calmly, that we may look beyond
them, understanding what they are, not what they would maintain. It is
essential it be understood what they are for, because it is their
purpose to make meaningless and to attack the truth. Here are the laws
that rule the world you made. And yet they govern nothing and need not
be broken; merely looked upon and gone beyond.

^20^ The first chaotic law is that the truth is different for everyone.
Like all these principles, this one maintains that each is separate and
has a different set of thoughts which sets him off from others. This
principle evolves from the belief there is a hierarchy of illusions;
some are more valuable and therefore true. Each one establishes this for
himself and *makes* it true by his attack on what another values. And
this is justified because the values differ and those who hold them seem
to be unlike and therefore enemies.

^21^ Think how this seems to interfere with the first principle of
miracles. For this establishes degrees of truth among illusions, making
it appear that some of them are harder to overcome than others. If it
were realized that they are all the same and equally untrue, it would be
easy, then, to understand that miracles apply to *all* of them. Errors
of any kind can be corrected *because* they are untrue. When brought to
truth instead of to *each other*, they merely disappear. No part of
nothing can be more resistant to the truth than can another.

^22^ The second law of chaos, dear indeed to every worshiper of sin, is
that each one must sin and therefore deserves attack and death. This
principle, closely related to the first, is the demand that errors call
for punishment and not correction. For the destruction of the one who
makes the error places him beyond correction and beyond forgiveness.
What he has done is thus interpreted as an irrevocable sentence upon
himself, which God Himself is powerless to overcome. Sin cannot be
remitted, being the belief the Son of God can make mistakes for which
his own destruction becomes inevitable.

^23^ Think what this seems to do to the relationship between the Father
and the Son. Now it appears that they can never be one again. For *one*
must always be condemned and by the *other*. Now are they different and
*enemies*. And their relationship is one of opposition, just as the
separate aspects of the Son meet only to conflict but not to join. One
becomes weak, the other strong by his defeat. And fear of God and of
each other now appears as sensible, made real by what the Son of God has
done both to himself and his Creator. The arrogance on which the laws of
chaos stand could not be more apparent than emerges here.

^24^ Here is a principle which would define what the Creator of reality
must be; what He must think and what He must believe; and how He must
respond, believing it. It is not seen as even necessary that He be asked
about the truth of what has been established for His belief. His Son can
tell Him this, and He has but the choice whether to take his word for it
or be mistaken. This leads directly to the third preposterous belief
that seems to make chaos eternal. For if God cannot *be* mistaken, then
He *must* accept his Son's belief in what he is and hate him for it.

^25^ See how the fear of God is reinforced by this third principle. Now
it becomes impossible to turn to Him for help in misery. For now He has
become the "enemy" Who *caused* it and to Whom appeal is useless. Nor
can salvation lie within the Son, whose every aspect seems to be at war
with Him and justified in its attack. And now is conflict made
inevitable and beyond the help of God. And now salvation must remain
impossible because the savior has become the enemy.

^26^ There can be no release and no escape. Atonement thus becomes a
myth, and vengeance, not forgiveness, is the Will of God. From where all
this begins, there is no sight of help that can succeed. Only
destruction can *be* the outcome. And God Himself seems to be siding
with it to overcome His Son. Think not the ego will enable you to find
escape from what it *wants*. That is the function of this course, which
does not value what the ego cherishes.

^27^ The ego values only what it *takes*. This leads to the fourth law
of chaos, which, if the others are accepted, must be true. This seeming
law is the belief you *have* what you have taken. By this, another's
loss becomes your gain, and thus it fails to recognize that you can
never take away save from *yourself*. Yet all the other laws must lead
to this. For enemies do not give willingly to one another, nor would
they seek to share the things they value. And what your enemies would
keep from you must be worth having, just because they keep it hidden
from your sight.

^28^ All of the mechanisms of madness are seen emerging here: the
"enemy," made strong by keeping hidden the valuable inheritance which
should be yours; your justified position and attack for what has been
withheld; and the inevitable loss the enemy must suffer to save
yourself. Thus do the guilty ones protest their "innocence." Were they
not forced into this foul attack by the unscrupulous behavior of the
enemy, they would respond with only kindness. But in a savage world, the
kind cannot survive, so they must take or else be taken from.

^29^ And now there is a vague unanswered question, not yet "explained."
What is this precious thing, this priceless pearl, this hidden secret
treasure, to be wrested in righteous wrath from this most treacherous
and cunning enemy? It must be what you want but never found. And now you
"understand" the reason why you found it not. For it was taken from you
by this enemy and hidden where you would not think to look. He hid it in
his body, making it the cover for his guilt, the hiding place for what
belongs to you. Now must his body be destroyed and sacrificed that you
may *have* that which belongs to you. His treachery demands his death
that *you* may live. And you attack only in self defense.

^30^ But what is it you want that *needs* his death? Can you be sure
your murderous attack is justified unless you know what it is *for*? And
here a *final* principle of chaos comes to the rescue. It holds there is
a *substitute* for love. This is the "magic" that will cure all of your
pain; the missing factor in your madness that makes it "sane." This is
the reason why you must attack. Here is what makes your vengeance
justified. Behold, unveiled, the ego's secret gift, torn from your
brother's body, hidden there in malice and in hatred for the one to whom
the gift belongs. He would deprive you of the secret ingredient which
would give meaning to your life. The substitute for love, born of your
enmity to one another, must be salvation. It has no substitute, and
there is only one. And all your relationships have but the purpose of
seizing it and making it your own.

^31^ Never is your possession made complete. And never will your brother
cease his attack on you for what you stole. Nor will God end His
vengeance upon both, for in His madness He must have this substitute for
love and kill you both. You who believe you walk in sanity, with feet on
solid ground and through a world where meaning can be found, consider
this: \[These *are* the laws on which your "sanity" appears to rest.\]
These *are* the principles which make the ground beneath your feet seem
solid. And it *is* here you look for meaning. These are the laws you
made for your salvation. They hold in place the substitute for Heaven
which you prefer. This is their purpose; they were made for this. There
is no point in asking what they mean. That is apparent. The means of
madness must be insane. Are you as certain that you realize the *goal*
is madness?

^32^ No one *wants* madness, nor does anyone cling to his madness if he
sees that this is what it *is*. What protects madness is the belief that
it is *true*. It is the function of insanity to take the *place* of
truth. It must be seen as truth to be believed. And if it is the truth,
then must its opposite, which was the truth before, be madness now. Such
a reversal, completely turned around, with madness sanity, illusions
true, attack a kindness, hatred love and murder benediction, is the goal
the laws of chaos serve. These are the means by which the laws of God
appear to be reversed. Here do the laws of sin appear to hold love
captive and let sin go free.

^33^ These do not *seem* to be the goals of chaos, for by the great
reversal, they appear to be the laws of *order*. How could it not be so?
Chaos is lawlessness and *has* no laws. To be believed, its seeming laws
must be perceived as real. Their goal of madness must be seen as sanity.
And fear, with ashen lips and sightless eyes, blinded and terrible to
look upon, is lifted to the throne of love, its dying conqueror, its
substitute, the savior from salvation. How lovely do the laws of fear
make death appear! Give thanks unto the hero on love's throne, who saved
the Son of God for fear and death!

^34^ And yet, how can it be that laws like these can be believed? There
is a strange device that makes it possible. Nor is it unfamiliar; we
have seen how it appears to function many times before. In truth it does
*not* function, yet in dreams, where only shadows play the major roles,
it seems most powerful. No law of chaos could compel belief but for the
emphasis on *form* and disregard of *content*. No one who thinks that
one of them is true *sees* what it says. Some forms it takes seem to
have meaning, and that is all.

^35^ How can some forms of murder *not* mean death? Can an attack in
*any* form be love? What *form* of condemnation is a blessing? Who makes
his savior powerless and *finds* salvation? Let not the form of the
attack on him deceive you. You *cannot* seek to harm him and be saved.
Who can find safety from attack by turning on himself? How can it matter
*what* the form this madness takes? It is a judgment that defeats
itself, condemning what it says it wants to save. Be not deceived when
madness takes a form you think is lovely. What is intent on your
destruction is *not* your friend.

^36^ You would maintain and think it true that you do not believe these
senseless laws nor act upon them. And when you look at what they *say*,
they cannot *be* believed. Brothers, you *do* believe them. For how else
could you perceive the form they take with content such as this? Can
*any* form of this be tenable? Yet you believe them *for* the form they
take and do not *recognize* the content. It never changes. Can you paint
rosy lips upon a skeleton, dress it in loveliness, pet it and pamper it,
and make it *live*? And can you be content with an *illusion* that you
are living?

^37^ There *is* not life outside of Heaven. Where God created life,
there life must be. In any state apart from Heaven, life is illusion. At
best, it seems like life; at worst, like death. Yet both are judgments
on what is not life, equal in their inaccuracy and lack of meaning. Life
not in Heaven is impossible, and what is not in Heaven is not anywhere.
Outside of Heaven, only the conflict of illusions stands; senseless,
impossible, and beyond all reason, and yet perceived as an eternal
barrier to Heaven. Illusions *are* but forms. Their content is *never*
true.

^38^ The laws of chaos govern all illusions. Their forms conflict,
making it seem quite possible to value some above the others. Yet each
one rests as surely on the belief the laws of chaos are the laws of
order as do the others. Each one upholds these laws completely, offering
a certain witness that these laws are true. The seeming gentler forms of
the attack are no less certain in their witnessing or their results.
Certain it is illusions will bring fear because of the beliefs that they
imply, not for their form. And lack of faith in love in *any* form
attests to chaos as reality.

^39^ From the belief in sin, the faith in chaos *must* follow. It is
because it follows that it seems to be a logical conclusion-a valid step
in ordered thought. The steps to chaos *do* follow neatly from their
starting point. Each is a different form in the progression of truth's
reversal, leading still deeper into terror and away from truth. Think
not one step is smaller than another nor that return from one is easier.
The whole descent from Heaven lies in each one. And where your thinking
starts, there must it end.

^40^ Brothers, take not one step in the descent to hell. For having
taken one, you will not recognize the rest for what they are. And they
*will* follow. Attack in any form has placed your foot upon the twisted
stairway that leads from Heaven. Yet any instant it is possible to have
all this undone. How can you know whether you chose the stairs to Heaven
or the way to hell? Quite easily. How do you feel? Is peace in your
awareness? Are you certain which way you go? And are you sure the goal
of Heaven *can* be reached? If not, you walk alone. Ask, then, your
Friend to join with you and *give* you certainty of where you go.
:::

[]{#part0028_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Salvation without Compromise**](#part0004.html#level-194) {#part0028_split_003.html#h1-194 .level1a}

^41^ Is it not true you do not recognize some of the forms attack can
take? If it is true attack in any form will hurt you and will do so just
as much as in another form which you *do* recognize, then it must follow
that you do not always recognize the source of pain. Attack in *any*
form is equally destructive. Its purpose does not change. Its sole
intent is murder, and what form of murder serves to cover the massive
guilt and frantic fear of punishment the murderer must feel? He may deny
he is a murderer and justify his savagery with smiles as he attacks. Yet
he will suffer and will look on his intent in nightmares where the
smiles are gone and where the purpose rises to meet his horrified
awareness and pursue him still. For no one thinks of murder and escapes
the guilt the *thought* entails. If the intent is death, what matter the
form it takes?

^42^ Is death in any form, however lovely and charitable it may seem to
be, a blessing and a sign the Voice for God speaks through you to your
brother? The wrapping does not make the gift you give. An empty box,
however beautiful and gently given, still contains nothing. And neither
the receiver nor the giver is long deceived. Withhold forgiveness from
your brother, and you attack him. You give him nothing and receive of
him but what you gave.

^43^ Salvation is no compromise of any kind. To compromise is to accept
but part of what you want-to take a little and give up the rest.
Salvation gives up nothing. It is complete for everyone. Let the idea of
compromise but enter, and the awareness of salvation's purpose is lost
because it is not recognized. It is denied where compromise has been
accepted, for compromise is the belief salvation is impossible. It would
maintain you can attack a little, love a little, and know the
*difference*. Thus it would teach a little of the same can still be
different, and yet the same remain intact as one. Does this make sense?
Can it *be* understood?

^44^ This course is easy just because it makes no compromise. Yet it
seems difficult to those who still believe that compromise is possible.
They do not see that, if it is, salvation is *attack*. Yet it is certain
the belief that salvation is impossible cannot uphold a quiet, calm
assurance it has come. Forgiveness cannot be withheld a little. Nor is
it possible to attack for this and love for that and understand
forgiveness. Would you not *want* to recognize assault upon your peace
in any form, if only thus does it become impossible that *you* lose
sight of it? It can be kept shining before your vision, forever clear
and never out of sight if you defend it not.

^45^ Those who believe that peace can *be* defended and that attack is
justified on its behalf cannot perceive it lies within them. How could
they know? Could they accept forgiveness side by side with the belief
that murder takes some forms by which their peace is saved? Would they
be willing to accept the fact their savage purpose is directed against
themselves? No one unites with enemies nor is at one with them in
purpose. And no one compromises with an enemy but hates him still for
what he kept from him.

^46^ Mistake not truce for peace, nor compromise for the escape from
conflict. To be released from conflict means that it is *over*. The door
is open; you have *left* the battleground. You have not lingered there
in cowering hope because the guns are still an instant and the fear that
haunts the place of death is not apparent that it will not return. There
*is* no safety in a battleground. You can look down on it in safety from
above and not be touched. But from within it, you can find *no* safety.
Not one tree left standing still will shelter you. Not one illusion of
protection stands against the faith in murder. Here stands the body,
torn between the natural desire to communicate and the unnatural intent
to murder and to die. Think you the *form* that murder takes can offer
safety? Can guilt be *absent* from a battlefield? \[Do not remain in
conflict, for there *is* no war without attack.\]
:::

[]{#part0028_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Fear of Life**](#part0004.html#level-195) {#part0028_split_004.html#h1-195 .level1a}

^47^ The fear of God is fear of *life* and not of death. Yet He remains
the only place of safety. In Him is no attack, and no illusion in any
form stalks Heaven. Heaven is wholly true. No difference enters, and
what is all the same cannot conflict. You are not asked to fight against
your wish to murder. But you *are* asked to realize the form it takes
conceals the same intent. And it is *this* you fear and not the form.
What is not love is murder. What is not loving *must* be an attack.
Every illusion is an assault on truth, and every one does violence to
the idea of love because it seems to be of *equal* truth.

^48^ What can be equal to the truth yet different? Murder and love are
incompatible. Yet if they both are true, then must they be the same and
indistinguishable from one another. So will they be to those who see
God's Son a body. For it is not the body that is like the Son's Creator.
And what is lifeless cannot *be* the Son of Life. How can a body be
extended to hold the universe? Can it create and *be* what it creates?
And can it offer its creations all that it is and never suffer loss?

^49^ God does not share His function with a body. He gave the function
to create unto His Son because it is His own. It is not sinful to
believe the function of the Son is murder, but it *is* insanity. What is
the same can *have* no different function. Creation is the means for
God's extension, and what is His must be His Son's as well. Either the
Father *and* the Son are murderers or neither is. Life makes not death,
creating like itself.

^50^ The lovely light of your relationship is like the love of God. It
cannot yet assume the holy function God gave His Son, for your
forgiveness of one another is not complete as yet, and so it cannot be
extended to all creation. Each form of murder and attack that still
attracts you and that you do not recognize for what it is limits the
healing and the miracles you have the power to extend to all. Yet does
the Holy Spirit understand how to increase your little gifts and make
them mighty. Also He understands how your relationship is raised above
the battleground, in it no more. This is your part-to realize that
murder in *any* form is not your will. The *overlooking* of the
battleground is now your purpose.

^51^ Be lifted up and from a higher place look down upon it. From there
will your perspective be quite different. Here in the midst of it, it
*does* seem real. Here you have *chosen* to be part of it. Here murder
*is* your choice. Yet from above, the choice is miracles instead of
murder. And the perspective coming from this choice shows you the battle
is not real and easily escaped. Bodies may battle, but the clash of
forms is meaningless. And it is over when you realize that it never was
begun. How can a battle be perceived as nothingness when you engage in
it? How can the truth of miracles be recognized if murder is your
choice?

^52^ When the temptation to attack rises to make your mind darkened and
murderous, remember you *can* see the battle from above. Even in forms
you do not recognize, the signs you know. There is a stab of pain, a
twinge of guilt, and above all, a loss of peace. This you know well.
When it occurs, leave not your place on high but quickly choose a
miracle *instead* of murder. And God Himself and all the lights of
Heaven will gently lean to you and hold you up. For you have chosen to
remain where He would have you, and *no* illusion can attack the peace
of God together with His Son.

^53^ See no one from the battleground, for there you look on him from
nowhere. You have no reference-point from where to look, where meaning
can be given what you see. For only bodies could attack and murder, and
if this is your purpose, then you must be one with them. Only a purpose
unifies, and those who share a purpose have a mind as one. The body
*has* no purpose and must be solitary. From below, it cannot be
surmounted. From above, the limits it exerts on those in battle still
are gone and not perceived. The body stands between the Father and the
Heaven He created for His Son *because* it has no purpose.

^54^ Think what is given those who share their Father's purpose and who
know that it is theirs! They want for nothing. Sorrow of any kind is
inconceivable. Only the light they love is in awareness, and only love
shines upon them forever. It is their past, their present, and their
future always the same, eternally complete, and wholly shared. They know
it is impossible their happiness could ever suffer change of any kind.
Perhaps you think the battleground can offer something that you can win.
Can it be anything that offers you a perfect calmness and a sense of
love so deep and quiet that no touch of doubt can ever mar your
certainty? And that will last forever?

^55^ Those with the strength of God in their awareness could never think
of battle. What could they gain but *loss* of their perfection? For
everything fought for on the battleground is of the body-something it
seems to offer or to own. No one who knows that he has everything could
seek for limitation, nor could he value the body's offerings. The
senselessness of conquest is quite apparent from the quiet sphere above
the battleground. What can conflict with everything? And what is there
that offers less, yet could be wanted more? Who with the love of God
upholding him could find the choice of miracles or murder hard to make?
:::

[]{#part0029_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 24**](#part0004.html#chap-24) {#part0029_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**Specialness and Separation**](#part0004.html#chap-24) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-196) {#part0029_split_000.html#h1-196 .level1a1}

^24:1^ Forget not that the motivation for this course is the attainment
and the keeping of the state of peace. Given this state the mind is
quiet, and the condition in which God is remembered is attained. It is
not necessary to tell Him what to do. He will not fail. Where He can
enter, there He is already. And can it be He cannot enter where He wills
to be? Peace will be yours *because* it is His Will. Can you believe a
shadow can hold back the Will that holds the universe secure? God does
not wait upon illusions to let Him be Himself. No more His Son. They
*are*. And what illusion that idly seems to drift between them has the
power to defeat what is Their Will?

^2^ To learn this course requires willingness to question every value
that you hold. Not one can be kept hidden and obscure but it will
jeopardize your learning. No belief is neutral. Every one has the power
to dictate each decision you make. For a decision is a conclusion based
on everything that you believe. It is the *outcome* of belief and
follows it as surely as does suffering follow guilt and freedom
sinlessness. There *is* no substitute for peace. What God creates *has*
no alternative. The truth arises from what He *knows*. And your
decisions come from your beliefs as certainly as all creation rose in
His Mind *because* of what He knows.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Specialness as a Substitute for Love**](#part0004.html#level-197) {#part0029_split_001.html#h1-197 .level1a}

^3^ Love is extension. To withhold the smallest gift is not to know
love's purpose. Love offers everything forever. Hold back but one
belief, one offering, and love is gone because you asked a substitute to
take its place. And now must war, the substitute for peace, come with
the one alternative that you can choose for love. Your choosing it has
given it all the reality it seems to have.

^4^ Beliefs will never openly attack each other because conflicting
outcomes are impossible. But an unrecognized belief is a decision to war
in secret, where the results of conflict are kept unknown and never
brought to reason to be considered sensible or not. And many senseless
outcomes have been reached, and meaningless decisions have been made and
kept hidden to become beliefs now given power to direct all subsequent
decisions. Mistake you not the power of these hidden warriors to disrupt
your peace. For it *is* at their mercy while you decide to leave it
there. The secret enemies of peace, your least decision to choose attack
instead of love, unrecognized and swift to challenge you to combat and
to violence far more inclusive than you think, are there by your
election. Do not deny their presence nor their terrible results. All
that can be denied is their *reality* but not their outcome.

^5^ All that is ever cherished as a hidden belief, to be defended though
unrecognized, is faith in specialness. This takes many forms but always
clashes with the reality of God's creation and with the grandeur which
He gave His Son. What else could justify attack? For who could hate
someone whose Self is his and whom He knows? Only the special could have
enemies, for they are different and not the same. And difference of any
kind imposes orders of reality and a need to judge that cannot be
escaped.

^6^ What God created cannot be attacked, for there is nothing in the
universe unlike itself. But what is different *calls* for judgment, and
this must come from someone "better," someone incapable of being like
what he condemns, "above" it, sinless by comparison with it. And thus
does specialness become a means and end at once. For specialness not
only sets apart but serves as grounds from which attack on those who
seem "beneath" the special one is "natural" and "just." The special ones
feel weak and frail *because* of differences, for what would make them
special *is* their enemy. Yet they protect its enmity and call it
"friend." On its behalf they fight against the universe, for nothing in
the world they value more.

^7^ Specialness is the great dictator of the wrong decisions. Here is
the grand illusion of what you are and what your brother is. And here is
what must make the body dear and worth preserving. Specialness must be
*defended*. Illusions *can* attack it, and they *do*. For what your
brother must become to *keep* your specialness *is* an illusion. He who
is "worse" than you must be attacked so that your specialness can live
on his defeat. For specialness is triumph, and its victory is his defeat
and shame. How can he live with all your sins upon him? And who must be
his conqueror but you?

^8^ Would it be possible for you to hate your brother if you were like
him? Could you attack him if you realized you journey with him to a goal
that is the same? Would you not help him reach it in every way you could
if his attainment of it were perceived as yours? You *are* his enemy in
specialness; his friend in a shared purpose. Specialness can never
share, for it depends on goals that you alone can reach. And he must
never reach them, or your goal is jeopardized. Can love have meaning
where the goal is triumph? And what decision can be made for this that
will not hurt you? Your brother is your friend *because* his Father
created him like you. There *is* no difference. You have been given to
each other that love might be extended, not cut off from one another.
What you *keep* is lost to you. God gave you both Himself, and to
remember this is now the only purpose that you share. And so it is the
only one you *have*.

^9^ Could you attack each other if you chose to see no specialness of
any kind between you? Look fairly at whatever makes you give each other
only partial welcome or would let you think that you are better off
apart. Is it not always your belief your specialness is *limited* by
your relationship? And is not this the "enemy" that makes you both
illusions to each other?

^10^ The fear of God and of each other comes from each unrecognized
belief in specialness. For each demands the other bow to it *against*
his will. And God Himself must honor it or suffer vengeance. Every
twinge of malice or stab of hate or wish to separate arises here. For
here the purpose which you share becomes obscured from both of you. You
would oppose this course because it teaches you you are *alike*. You
have no purpose that is not the same and none your Father does not share
with you. For your relationship has been made clean of special goals.
And would you now *defeat* the goal of holiness that Heaven gave it?
What perspective can the special have that does not change with every
seeming blow, each slight, or fancied judgment on itself?

^11^ Those who are special *must* defend illusions against the truth.
For what is specialness but an attack upon the Will of God? You love
your brother not while it is this you would defend against him. This is
what *he* attacks and *you* protect. Here is the ground of battle which
you wage against him. Here must he be your enemy and not your friend.
Never can there be peace among the different. He is your friend
*because* you are the same.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Treachery of Specialness**](#part0004.html#level-198) {#part0029_split_002.html#h1-198 .level1a}

^12^ Comparison must be an ego device, for love makes none. Specialness
*always* makes comparisons. It is established by a lack seen in another
and maintained by searching for and keeping clear in sight all lacks it
can perceive. This does it seek, and this it looks upon. And always whom
it thus diminishes would be your savior had you not chosen to make of
him a tiny measure of your specialness instead. Against the littleness
you see in him, you stand as tall and stately, clean and honest, pure
and unsullied by comparison with what you see. Nor do you understand it
is *yourself* that you diminish thus.

^13^ Pursuit of specialness is always at the cost of peace. Who can
attack his savior and cut him down yet *recognize* his strong support?
Who can detract from his omnipotence yet *share* his power? And who can
use him as the gauge of littleness and be *released* from limits? You
have a function in salvation. Its pursuit will bring you joy. But the
pursuit of specialness *must* bring you pain. Here is a goal that would
defeat salvation and thus run counter to the Will of God. To value
specialness is to esteem an alien will to which illusions of yourself
are dearer than the truth.

^14^ Specialness is the idea of sin made real. Sin is impossible even to
imagine without this base. For sin arose from it out of nothingness; an
evil flower with no roots at all. Here is the self-made "savior," the
"creator" who creates unlike the Father and which made His Son like to
itself and not like unto Him. His "special" sons are many, *never* one,
each one in exile from himself and Him of Whom they are a part. Nor do
they love the Oneness Which created them as one with Him. They chose
their specialness instead of Heaven and instead of peace and wrapped it
carefully in sin to keep it "safe" from truth.

^15^ You are *not* special. If you think you are and would defend your
specialness against the truth of what you *really* are, how can you know
the truth? What answer that the Holy Spirit gives can reach you when it
is your specialness to which you listen and which asks and answers? Its
tiny answer, soundless in the melody which pours from God to you
eternally in loving praise of what you are, is all you listen to. And
that vast song of honor and of love for what you are seems silent and
unheard before its "mightiness." You strain your ears to hear its
soundless voice, and yet the Call of God Himself is soundless to you.

^16^ You can defend your specialness, but never will you hear the Voice
for God beside it. They speak a different language and they fall on
different ears. To every special one a different message, and one with
different meaning, is the truth. Yet how can truth be different to each
one? The special messages the special hear convince them they are
different and apart-each in his special sins and "safe" from love, which
does not see his specialness at all. Christ's vision is their "enemy,"
for it sees not what they would look upon, and it would show them that
the specialness they think they see *is* an illusion. What would they
see instead?

^17^ The shining radiance of the Son of God, so like his Father that the
memory of Him springs instantly to mind. And with this memory, the Son
remembers his own creations, as like to him as he is to his Father. And
all the world he made and all his specialness and all the sins he held
in its defense against himself will vanish as his mind accepts the truth
about himself as it returns to take their place. This is the only "cost"
of truth: you will no longer see what never was, nor hear what makes no
sound. Is it a sacrifice to give up nothing and to receive the love of
God forever?

^18^ You who have chained your savior to your specialness and given it
his place, remember this: He has not lost the power to forgive you all
the sins you think you placed between him and the function of salvation
given him for you. Nor will you change his function, any more than you
can change the truth in him and in yourself. But be you certain that the
truth is just the same in both. It gives no different messages and has
*one* meaning. And it is one you *both* can understand, and one which
brings release to *both* of you. Here stands your brother with the key
to Heaven in his hand held out to you. Let not the dream of specialness
remain between you. What is one is joined in truth.

^19^ Think of the loveliness that you will see within yourself when you
have looked on him as on a friend. He *is* the enemy of specialness but
only friend to what is real in you. Not one attack you thought you made
on him has taken from him the gift that God would have him give to you.
His need to give it is as great as yours to have it. Let him forgive you
all your specialness and make you whole in mind and one with him. He
waits for your forgiveness only that he may return it unto you. It is
not God Who has condemned His Son. But only you, to save his specialness
and kill his Self.

^20^ You have come far along the way of truth-too far to falter now.
Just one step more and every vestige of the fear of God will melt away
in love. Your brother's specialness and yours *are* enemies and bound in
hate to kill each other and deny they are the same. Yet it is not
illusions which have reached this final obstacle that seems to make God
and His Heaven so remote that they cannot be reached. Here in this holy
place does truth stand waiting to receive you both in silent blessing
and in peace so real and so encompassing that nothing stands outside.
Leave all illusions of yourself outside this place to which you come in
hope and honesty.

^21^ Here is your savior *from* your specialness. He is in need of your
acceptance of himself as part of you, as you for his. You are alike to
God as God is to Himself. He is not special, for He would not keep one
part of what He is unto Himself, not given to His Son but kept for Him
alone. And it is this you fear, for if He is not special, then He willed
His Son be like Him, and your brother *is* like you. Not special, but
possessed of everything *including* you.

^22^ Give him but what he has, remembering God gave Himself to both of
you in equal love that both might share the universe with Him Who chose
that love could never be divided and kept separate from what it is and
must forever be. You *are* your brother's; part of love was not denied
to him. But can it be that *you* have lost because *he* is complete?
What has been given him makes *you* complete, as it does him. God's love
gave you to him and him to you because He gave Himself. What is the same
as God is one with Him. And only specialness could make the truth of God
and you *as* one seem anything but Heaven, and the hope of peace at last
in sight.

^23^ Specialness is the seal of treachery upon the gift of love.
Whatever serves its purpose must be given to kill. No gift that bears
its seal but offers treachery to giver *and* receiver. Not one glance
from eyes it veils but looks on sight of death. Not one believer in its
potency but seeks for bargains and for compromise that would establish
sin love's substitute and serve it faithfully. And no relationship that
holds its purpose dear but clings to murder as safety's weapon and the
great defender of all illusions from the "threat" of love.

^24^ The hope of specialness makes it seem possible God made the body as
the prison-house which keeps His Son from Him. For it demands a special
place God cannot enter and a hiding-place where none is welcome but your
tiny self. Nothing is sacred here but unto you and you alone, apart and
separate from all your brothers, safe from all intrusions of sanity upon
illusions, safe from God, and safe for conflict everlasting. Here are
the gates of hell you closed upon yourself, to rule in madness and in
loneliness your special kingdom, apart from God, away from truth and
from salvation.

^25^ The key you threw away God gave your brother, whose holy hands
would offer it to you when you were ready to accept His plan for your
salvation in place of yours. How could this readiness be reached save
through the sight of all your misery and the awareness that your plan
has failed and will forever fail to bring you peace and joy of any kind?
Through this despair you travel now, yet it is but *illusion* of
despair. The death of specialness is not *your* death but your awaking
into life eternal. You but emerge from an illusion of what you are to
the acceptance of yourself as God created you.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Forgiveness of Specialness**](#part0004.html#level-199) {#part0029_split_003.html#h1-199 .level1a}

^26^ Forgiveness is the end of specialness. Only illusions can be
forgiven, and then they disappear. Forgiveness is release from *all*
illusions, and that is why it is impossible but partly to forgive. No
one who clings to one illusion can see himself as sinless, for he holds
one error to himself as lovely still. And so he calls it "unforgivable"
and makes it sin. How can he then *give* his forgiveness wholly, when he
would not receive it for himself? For it is sure he would receive it
wholly the instant that he gave it so. And thus his secret guilt would
disappear, forgiven by himself.

^27^ Whatever form of specialness you cherish, you have made sin.
Inviolate it stands, strongly defended with all your puny might against
the Will of God. And thus it stands against yourself; *your* enemy, not
God's. So does it seem to split you off from God and make you separate
from Him as its defender. You would protect what God created not. And
yet this idol that seems to *give* you power has taken it away. For you
have given your brother's birthright to it, leaving him alone and
unforgiven and yourself in sin beside him, both in misery before the
idol that can save you not.

^28^ It is not *you* that is so vulnerable and open to attack that just
a word, a little whisper that you do not like, a circumstance that suits
you not, or an event that you did not anticipate upsets your world and
hurls it into chaos. Truth is not frail. Illusions leave it perfectly
unmoved \[and undisturbed\]. But specialness is *not* the truth in you.
*It* can be thrown off balance by anything. What rests on nothing
*never* can be stable. However large and overblown it seems to be, it
still must rock and turn and whirl about with every breeze.

^29^ Without foundation nothing is secure. Would God have left His Son
in such a state, where safety has no meaning? No, His Son is safe,
resting on Him. It is your specialness that is attacked by everything
that walks and breathes or creeps or crawls or even lives at all.
Nothing is safe from its attack, and it is safe from nothing. It will
forever more be unforgiving, for that is what it *is*-a secret vow that
what God wants for you will never be and that you will oppose His Will
forever. Nor is it possible the two can ever be the same while
specialness stands like a flaming sword of death between them and makes
them "enemies."

^30^ God asks for your forgiveness. He would have no separation, like an
alien will, rise between what He wills for you and what you will. They
*are* the same, for neither one wills specialness. How could they will
the death of love itself? Yet they are powerless to make attack upon
illusions. They are not bodies; as One Mind they wait for all illusions
to be brought to them and left behind. Salvation challenges not even
death. And God Himself, Who knows that death is not your will, must say,
"Thy will be done" because *you* think it *is*.

^31^ Forgive the great Creator of the universe, the Source of life, of
love and holiness, the perfect Father of a perfect Son, for your
illusions of your specialness. Here is the hell you chose to be your
home. He chose not this for you. Ask not He enter this. The way is
barred to love and to salvation. Yet if you would release your brother
from the depths of hell, you have forgiven Him Whose Will it is you rest
forever in the arms of peace in perfect safety and without the heat and
malice of one thought of specialness to mar your rest. Forgive the Holy
One the specialness He could not give and which you made instead.

^32^ The special ones are all asleep, surrounded by a world of
loveliness they do not see. Freedom and peace and joy stand there beside
the bier on which they sleep and call them to come forth and waken from
their dream of death. Yet they hear nothing. They are lost in dreams of
specialness. They hate the call that would awaken them, and they curse
God because He did not make their dream reality. Curse God and die, but
not by Him Who made not death, but only in the dream. Open your eyes a
little; see the savior God gave to you that you might look on him and
give him back his birthright. It is *yours.*

^33^ The slaves of specialness will yet be free. Such is the Will of God
and of His Son. Would God condemn *Himself* to hell and to damnation?
And do *you* will that this be done unto your savior? God calls to you
from him to join His Will to save you *both* from hell. Look on the
print of nails upon his hands that he holds out for your forgiveness.
God asks your mercy on His Son and on Himself. Deny them not. They ask
of you but that your will be done. They seek your love that you may love
yourself. Love not your specialness instead of them. The print of nails
are on your hands as well. Forgive your Father. It was not His Will that
you be crucified.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Specialness and Salvation**](#part0004.html#level-200) {#part0029_split_004.html#h1-200 .level1a}

^34^ Specialness is a lack of trust in anyone except yourself. Faith is
invested in yourself alone. Everything else becomes your enemy-feared
and attacked, deadly and dangerous, hated and worthy only of
destruction. Whatever gentleness it offers is but deception, but its
hate is real. In danger of destruction, it must kill, and you are drawn
to it to kill it first. And such is guilt's attraction. Here is death
enthroned as savior; crucifixion is now redemption, and salvation can
only mean destruction of the world, except yourself.

^35^ What could the purpose of the body *be* but specialness? And it is
this that makes it frail and helpless in its own defense. It was
conceived to make *you* frail and helpless. The goal of separation is
its curse. Yet bodies *have* no goal. Purpose is of the *mind*. And
minds can change as they desire. What they are and all their attributes,
they *cannot* change. But what they hold as purpose *can* be changed,
and body states must shift accordingly. Of itself the body can do
nothing. See it as means to hurt, and it is hurt. See it as means to
heal, and it is healed.

^36^ You can but hurt *yourself*. This has been oft repeated but is
difficult to grasp as yet. To minds intent on specialness, it is
impossible. Yet to those who wish to heal and not attack, it is quite
obvious. The purpose of attack is in the *mind*, and its effects are
felt but where it *is*. Nor is mind limited; so must it be that harmful
purpose hurts the mind as one. Nothing could make *less* sense to
specialness. Nothing could make *more* sense to miracles. For miracles
are merely change of purpose from hurt to healing.

^37^ This shift in purpose *does* "endanger" specialness but only in the
sense that all illusions are "threatened" by the truth. They will *not*
stand before it. Yet what comfort has ever been in them that you would
keep the gift your Father asks from Him and give it there instead? Given
to *Him*, the universe is yours. Offered to *them*, no gifts can be
returned. What you have given specialness has left you bankrupt and your
treasure house barren and empty with an open door inviting everything
that would disturb your peace to enter and destroy.

^38^ Long ago we said consider not the means by which salvation is
attained nor how to reach it. But *do* consider, and consider well,
whether it is your wish that you might see your brother sinless. To
specialness the answer must be "no." A sinless brother *is* its enemy,
while sin, if it were possible, would be its friend. Your brother's sins
would justify itself and give it meaning that the truth denies. All that
is real proclaims his sinlessness. All that is false proclaims his sins
as real. If *he* is sinful, then is *your* reality not real but just a
dream of specialness which lasts an instant, crumbling into dust.

^39^ Do not defend this senseless dream in which God is bereft of what
He loves and you remain beyond salvation. Only this is certain in this
shifting world which has no meaning in reality: when peace is not with
you entirely and when you suffer pain of any kind, you have beheld some
sin within your brother and have *rejoiced* at what you thought was
there. Your specialness seemed safe because of it. And thus you saved
what *you* appointed to be your savior and crucified the one whom God
has given you instead. So are you bound with him, for you *are* one. And
so is specialness his "enemy" and *yours* as well.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Resolution of the Dream**](#part0004.html#level-201) {#part0029_split_005.html#h1-201 .level1a}

^40^ The Christ in you is very still. He looks on what He loves and
knows it as Himself. And thus does He rejoice at what He sees because He
knows that it is one with Him and with His Father. Specialness, too,
takes joy in what it sees, although it is not true. Yet what you seek
for *is* a source of joy as you conceive it. What you wish is true for
you. Nor is it possible that you can wish for something and lack faith
that it is so. Wishing *makes* real, as surely as does will create. The
power of a wish upholds illusions as strongly as does love extend
itself, except that one deludes; the other heals.

^41^ There is no dream of specialness, however hidden or disguised the
form; however lovely it may seem to be; however much it delicately
offers the hope of peace and the escape from pain in which you suffer
not your condemnation. In dreams, effect and cause are interchanged, for
here the maker of the dream believes that what he made is happening to
him. He does not realize he picked a thread from here, a scrap from
there, and wove a picture out of nothing. For the parts do not belong
together, and the whole contributes nothing to the parts to give them
meaning.

^42^ Where could your peace arise *but* from forgiveness? The Christ in
you looks only on the truth and sees no condemnation that could *need*
forgiveness. He is at peace *because* He sees no sin. Identify with Him,
and what has He that you have not? He is your eyes, your ears, your
hands, your feet. How gentle are the sights He sees, the sounds He
hears. How beautiful His hand that holds His brother's, and how lovingly
He walks beside him, showing him what can be seen and heard and where he
will see nothing and there is no sound to hear.

^43^ Yet let your specialness direct his way, and *you* will follow. And
*both* will walk in danger, each intent, in the dark forest of the
sightless, unlit but by the shifting tiny gleams that spark an instant
from the fireflies of sin and then go out, to lead the other to a
nameless precipice and hurl him over it. For what can specialness
delight in but to kill? What does it seek for but the sight of death?
Where does it lead but to destruction? Yet think not that it looked upon
your brother first, nor hated him before it hated you. The sin its eyes
behold in him and love to look upon it saw in *you*, and looks on still
with joy. Yet *is* it joy to look upon decay and madness and believe
this crumbling thing, with flesh already loosened from the bone and
sightless holes for eyes, is like yourself?

^44^ Rejoice you *have* no eyes with which to see, no ears to listen,
and no hands to hold nor feet to guide. Be glad that only Christ can
lend you His, while you have need of them. They are illusions too, as
much as yours. And yet because they serve a different purpose, the
strength their purpose holds is given them. And what they see and hear
and hold and lead is given light that you may lead as you were led.

^45^ The Christ in you is very still. He knows where you are going, and
He leads you there in gentleness and blessing all the way. His love for
God replaces all the fear you thought you saw within yourself. His
holiness shows you Himself in him whose hand you hold and whom you lead
to Him. And what you see is like yourself. For what but Christ is there
to see and hear and love and follow home? He looked upon you first but
recognized that you were not complete. And so He sought for your
completion in each living thing that He beholds and loves. And seeks it
still, that each might offer you the love of God.

^46^ Yet is He quiet, for He knows that love is in you now and safely
held in you by that same hand that holds your brother's in your own.
Christ's hand holds all His brothers in Himself. He gives them vision
for their sightless eyes and sings to them of Heaven that their ears may
hear no more the sound of battle and of death. He reaches through them,
holding out His hand that everyone may bless all living things and see
their holiness. And He rejoices that these sights are yours to look upon
with Him and share His joy. His perfect lack of specialness He offers
you that you may save all living things from death, receiving from each
one the gift of life that your forgiveness offers to your Self. The
sight of Christ is all there is to see. The song of Christ is all there
is to hear. The hand of Christ is all there is to hold. There *is* no
journey but to walk with Him.

^47^ You who would be content with specialness and seek salvation in a
war with love, consider this: the holy Lord of Heaven has Himself come
down to you to offer you your own completion. What is His is yours
because in your completion is His Own. He Who willed not to be without
His Son could never will that you be brotherless. And would He give a
brother unto you except he be as perfect as yourself and just as like to
Him in holiness as *you* must be?

^48^ There must be doubt before there can be conflict. And every doubt
must be about yourself. Christ has no doubt, and from His certainty His
quiet comes. He will exchange His certainty for all your doubts if you
agree that He is one with you and that this Oneness is endless,
timeless, and within your grasp *because* your hands are His. He is
within you, yet He walks beside you and before, leading the way that He
must go to find Himself complete. His quietness becomes your certainty.
And where is doubt when certainty has come?
:::

[]{#part0029_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Salvation from Fear**](#part0004.html#level-202) {#part0029_split_006.html#h1-202 .level1a}

^49^ Before your brother's holiness the world is still and peace
descends on it in gentleness and blessing so complete that not one trace
of conflict still remains to haunt you in the darkness of the night. He
is your savior from the dreams of fear. He is the healing of your sense
of sacrifice and fear that what you have will scatter with the wind and
turn to dust. In him is your assurance God is here and with you *now*.
While he is what he is, you can be sure that God is knowable and *will*
be known to you. For He could never leave His own creation. And the sign
that this is so lies in your brother, offered you that all your doubts
about yourself may disappear before his holiness. See in him God's
creation. For in him, his Father waits for your acknowledgment that He
created you as part of Him.

^50^ Without you there would be a lack in God, a Heaven incomplete, a
Son without a Father. There could be no universe and no reality. For
what God wills is whole and part of Him because His Will is One. Nothing
alive that is not part of Him, and nothing *is* but is alive in Him.
Your brother's holiness shows you that God is one with him and you-that
what he has is yours *because* you are not separate from him nor from
his Father.

^51^ Nothing is lost to you in all the universe. Nothing that God
created has He failed to lay before you lovingly as yours forever. And
no thought within His Mind is absent from your own. It is His Will you
share His love for you and look upon yourself as lovingly as He
conceived of you before the world began and as He knows you still. God
changes not His Mind about His Son with passing circumstance, which has
no meaning in eternity where He abides and you with Him. Your brother
*is* as He created him. And it is this that saves you from a world that
He created not.

^52^ Forget not that the healing of God's Son is all the world is *for*.
That is the only purpose the Holy Spirit sees in it and thus the only
one it has. Until you see the healing of the Son as all you wish to be
accomplished by the world, by time, and all appearances, you will not
know the Father nor yourself. For you will use the world for what is not
its purpose and will not escape its laws of violence and death. Yet it
is given you to be beyond its laws in *all* respects, in *every* way,
and *every* circumstance, in *all* temptation to perceive what is not
there and *all* belief God's Son can suffer pain because he sees himself
as he is not.

^53^ Look on your brother and behold in him the whole reversal of the
laws that seem to rule this world. See in his freedom *yours*, for such
it is. Let not his specialness obscure the truth in him, for not one law
of death you bind him to will *you* escape. And not one sin you see in
him but keeps you *both* in hell. Yet will his perfect sinlessness
*release* you both, for holiness is quite impartial, with one judgment
made for all it looks upon. And that is made, not of itself, but through
the Voice that speaks for God in everything that lives and shares His
Being.

^54^ It is *His* sinlessness that eyes which see can look upon. It is
*His* loveliness they see in everything. And it is *He* they look for
everywhere and find no sight nor place nor time where He is not. Within
your brother's holiness, the perfect frame for your salvation and the
world's, is set the shining memory of Him in Whom your brother lives and
you along with him. Let not your eyes be blinded by the veil of
specialness that hides the face of Christ from him, and you as well. And
let the fear of God no longer hold the vision you were meant to see from
you. Your brother's body shows not Christ to you. He *is* set forth
within his holiness.

^55^ Choose, then, his body or his holiness as what you *want* to see,
and which you choose is yours to look upon. Yet will you choose in
countless situations and through time which seems to have no end until
the truth be your decision. For eternity is not regained by still one
more denial of Christ in him. And where is your salvation if he is but a
body? Where is your peace but in his holiness? And where is God Himself
but in that part of Him He set forever in your brother's holiness that
you might see the truth about yourself set forth at last in terms you
recognized and understood?

^56^ Your brother's holiness is sacrament and benediction unto you. His
errors cannot withhold God's blessing from himself nor you who see him
truly. His mistakes can cause delay, which it is given you to take from
him that both may end a journey that has never been begun and needs no
end. What never was is not a part of you. Yet you will *think* it is
until you realize that it is not a part of him who stands beside you. He
is the mirror of yourself wherein you see the judgment you have laid on
both of you. The Christ in you beholds his holiness. Your specialness
looks on his body and beholds him not.

^57^ See him as what he *is* that your deliverance may not be long. A
senseless wandering, without a purpose and without accomplishment of any
kind, is all the other choice can offer you. Futility of function not
fulfilled will haunt you while your brother lies asleep, till what has
been assigned to you is done and he is risen from the past. He who
condemned himself, and you as well, is given you to save from
condemnation along with you. And *both* shall see God's glory in His
Son, whom you mistook as flesh and bound to laws that have no power over
him at all.

^58^ Would you not gladly realize these laws are not for you? Then see
him not as prisoner to them. It cannot be what governs part of God holds
not for all the rest. You place yourself under the laws you see as
ruling him. Think, then, how great the love of God for you must be that
He has given you a part of Him to save from pain and give you happiness.
And never doubt but that your specialness will disappear before the Will
of God, Who loves each part of Him with equal love \[and care\]. The
Christ in you *can* see your brother truly. Would *you* decide against
the holiness He sees?

^59^ Specialness is the function which you gave yourself. It stands for
you alone, as self-created, self-maintained, in need of nothing, and
unjoined with anything beyond the body. In its eyes, you are a separate
universe with all the power to hold itself complete within itself, with
every entry shut against intrusion and every window barred against the
light. Always attacked and always furious, with anger always fully
justified, you have pursued this goal with vigilance you never thought
to yield and effort that you never thought to cease. And all this grim
determination was for this-you wanted specialness to be the *truth*.

^60^ Now you are merely asked that you pursue another goal with far less
vigilance-with little effort and with little time and with the power of
God maintaining it and promising success. Yet of the two, it is *this*
one you find more difficult. The "sacrifice" of self you understand, nor
do you deem this cost too heavy. But a tiny willingness, a nod to God, a
greeting to the Christ in you, you find a burden wearisome and tedious,
too heavy to be borne. Yet to the dedication to the truth as God
established it no sacrifice is asked, no strain called forth, and all
the power of Heaven and the might of truth itself is given to provide
the means and *guarantee* the goal's accomplishment.

^61^ You who believe it easier to see your brother's body than his
holiness, be sure you understand what made this judgment. Here is the
voice of specialness heard clearly, judging against the Christ and
setting forth for you the purpose that you can attain and what you
cannot do. Forget not that this judgment must apply to what you do with
*it* as your ally. For what you do through Christ it does not know. To
Him this judgment makes no sense at all, for only what His Father wills
is possible, and there is no alternative for Him to see. Out of His lack
of conflict comes your peace. And from His purpose comes the means for
effortless accomplishment and rest.
:::

[]{#part0029_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Meeting Place**](#part0004.html#level-203) {#part0029_split_007.html#h1-203 .level1a}

^62^ How bitterly does everyone tied to this world defend the
specialness he wants to be the truth! His wish is law unto him, and he
obeys. Nothing his specialness demands does he withhold. Nothing it
needs does he deny to what he loves. And while it calls to him, he hears
no other Voice. No effort is too great, no cost too much, no price too
dear to save his specialness from the least slight, the tiniest attack,
the whispered doubt, the hint of threat, or anything but deepest
reverence. This is your son, beloved of you as you are to your Father.
Yet it stands in place of your creations, who *are* son to you, that you
might *share* the Fatherhood of God, not snatch it from Him. What is
this son that you have made to be your strength? What is this child of
earth on whom such love is lavished? What is this parody of God's
creation that takes the place of yours? And where are *they*, now that
the host of God has found another son which he prefers to them.

^63^ The memory of God shines not alone. What is within your brother
still contains all of creation, everything created and creating, born
and unborn as yet, still in the future or apparently gone by. What is in
him is changeless, and your changelessness is recognized in its
acknowledgment. The holiness in you belongs to him. And by your seeing
it in him, returns to you. All of the tribute you have given specialness
belongs to him and thus returns to you. All of the love and care, the
strong protection, the thought by day and night, the deep concern, the
powerful conviction this is you belong to him. Nothing you gave to
specialness but is his due. And nothing due him is not due to you.

^64^ How can you know your worth while specialness claims you instead?
How can you fail to know it is in his holiness? Seek not to make your
specialness the truth, for if it were, you would be lost indeed. Be
thankful, rather, it is given you to see his holiness *because* it is
the truth. And what is true in him must be as true in you.

^65^ Ask yourself this: can *you* protect the mind? The body, yes, a
little-not from time, but temporarily. And much you think you save, you
hurt. What would you save it *for*? For in that choice lie both its
health and harm. Save it for show, as bait to catch another fish, to
house your specialness in better style or weave a frame of loveliness
around your hate, and you condemn it to decay and death. And if you see
this purpose in your brother's, such is your condemnation of your own.
Weave, rather then, a frame of holiness around him that the truth may
shine on him and give you safety from decay.

^66^ The Father keeps what He created safe. You cannot touch it with the
false ideas you made because it was created not by you. Let not your
foolish fancies frighten you. What is immortal cannot *be* attacked;
what is but temporal *has* no effect. Only the purpose that you see in
it has meaning, and if that is true, its safety rests secure. If not, it
has no purpose and is means for nothing. Whatever is perceived as means
for truth shares in its holiness and rests in light as safely as itself.
Nor will that light go out when it is gone. Its holy purpose gave it
immortality, setting another light in Heaven, where your creations
recognize a gift from you, a sign that you have not forgotten them.

^67^ The test of everything on earth is simply this: "What is it *for*?"
The answer makes it what it is for you. It has no meaning of itself, yet
you can give reality to it according to the purpose which you serve.
Here you are but means, along with it. God is a Means as well as End. In
Heaven, means and end are one, and one with Him. This is the state of
true creation, found not within time, but in eternity. To no one here is
this describable. Nor is there any way to learn what this condition
means. Not till you go past learning to the Given; not till you make
again a holy home for your creations is it understood.

^68^ A co-creator with the Father must have a Son. Yet must this Son
have been created like Himself. A perfect being, all-encompassing and
all-encompassed, nothing to add and nothing taken from-not born of size
nor weight nor time nor held to limits or uncertainties of any kind.
Here do the means and end unite as one, nor does this one have any end
at all. All this is true, and yet it has no meaning to anyone who still
retains one unlearned lesson in his memory, one thought with purpose
still uncertain, or one wish with a divided aim.

^69^ This course makes no attempt to teach what cannot easily be
learned. Its scope does not exceed your own, except to say that what is
yours will come to you when you are ready. Here are the means and
purpose separate because they were so made and so perceived. And
therefore do we deal with them as if they were. It is essential it be
kept in mind that all perception still is upside down until its purpose
has been understood. Perception does not *seem* to be a means. And it is
this that makes it hard to grasp the whole extent to which it must
depend on what you see it *for*. Perception seems to *teach* you what
you see. Yet it but witnesses to what *you* taught. It is the outward
picture of a wish-an image that you *wanted* to be true.

^70^ Look at yourself, and you will see a body. Look at this body in a
different light, and it looks different. And without a light, it seems
that it is gone. Yet you are reassured that it is there because you
still can feel it with your hands and hear it move. Here is an image
that you want to be yourself. It is the means to make your wish come
true. It gives the eyes with which you look on it, the hands that feel
it, and the ears with which you listened to the sounds it makes. It
*proves* its own reality to you.

^71^ Thus is the body made a theory of yourself with no provisions made
for evidence beyond itself and no escape within its sight. Its course is
sure when seen through its own eyes. It grows and withers, flourishes
and dies. And you cannot conceive of you apart from it. You brand it
sinful, and you hate its acts, judging it evil. Yet your specialness
whispers, "Here is my own beloved son, in whom I am well pleased." Thus
does the "son" become the means to serve his "father's" purpose. Not
identical, not even like, but still a means to offer to the "father"
what he *wants.* Such is the travesty on God's creation. For as His
Son's creation gave *Him* joy and witness to His love and shared His
purpose, so does the body testify to the idea that made it and speak for
its reality and truth.

^72^ And thus are two sons made, and both appear to walk this earth
without a meeting-place and no encounter. One do you see outside
yourself, your own beloved son. The other rests within, His Father's
Son, within your brother as he is in you. Their difference does not lie
in how they look, nor where they go, nor even what they do. They have a
different *purpose.* It is this that joins them to their like and
separates each from all aspects with a different purpose. The Son of God
retains His Father's Will. The son of man perceives an alien will and
wishes it were so. And thus does his perception serve his wish by giving
it appearances of truth. Yet can perception serve another goal. It is
not bound to specialness but by your choice. And it *is* given you to
make a different choice and use perception for a different purpose. And
what you see will serve that purpose well and *prove* its own reality to
you.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 25**](#part0004.html#chap-25) {#part0030_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Remedy**](#part0004.html#chap-25) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-204) {#part0030_split_000.html#h1-204 .level1a1}

^25:1^ The Christ in you inhabits not a body. Yet He is in you. And thus
it must be that *you* are not within a body. What is within you cannot
be outside. And it is certain that you cannot be apart from what is at
the very center of your life. What gives you life cannot be housed in
death. No more can you. Christ is within a frame of holiness whose only
purpose is that He may be made manifest to those who know Him not, that
He may call to them to come to Him and see Him where they thought their
bodies were. Then will their bodies melt away that they may frame His
holiness in them.

^2^ No one who carries Christ in him can fail to recognize Him
everywhere. *Except* in bodies. And as long as they believe *they* are
in bodies, where they think they are He cannot be. And so they carry Him
unknowingly and do not make Him manifest. And thus they do not recognize
Him where He is. The son of man is not the risen Christ. Yet does the
Son of God abide exactly where he is and walks with him within his
holiness, as plain to see as is his specialness set forth within his
body.

^3^ The body *needs* no healing. But the mind that thinks it *is* a body
is sick indeed! And it is here that Christ sets forth the remedy. His
purpose folds the body in His light and fills it with the holiness that
shines from Him. And nothing that the body says or does but makes Him
manifest. To those who know Him not, it carries Him in gentleness and
love to heal their minds. Such is the mission that your brother has for
you. And such it must be that your mission is for him.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Appointed Task**](#part0004.html#level-205) {#part0030_split_001.html#h1-205 .level1a}

^4^ It cannot be that it is hard to do the task that Christ appointed
you to do, since it is He Who does it. And in the doing of it will you
learn the body merely seems to be the means to do it. For the Mind is
His. And so it must be yours. His holiness directs the body through the
mind at one with Him. And you are manifest unto your holy brother, as he
to you. Here is the meeting of the holy Christ unto Himself; nor are any
differences perceived to stand between the aspects of His holiness,
which meet and join and raise Him to His Father, whole and pure and
worthy of His everlasting Love.

^5^ How can you manifest the Christ in you except to look on holiness
and see Him there? Perception tells you *you* are manifest in what you
see. Behold the body, and you will believe that you are there. And every
body that you look upon reminds you of yourself-your sinfulness, your
evil, and above all, your death. And would you not despise the one who
tells you this and seek his death instead? The message and the messenger
are one. And you *must* see your brother as yourself. Framed in his
body, you will see your sinfulness wherein you stand condemned. Set in
his holiness, the Christ in him proclaims *himself* as you.

^6^ Perception is a choice of what you want yourself to be-the world you
want to live in and the state in which you think your mind will be
content and satisfied. It chooses where you think your safety lies, at
your decision. It reveals yourself to you as you would have you be. And
always is it faithful to your purpose from which it never separates nor
gives the slightest witness unto anything the purpose in your mind
upholdeth not. Perception is a part of what it is your purpose to
behold, for means and end are never separate. And thus you learn what
seems to have a life apart has none.

^7^ *You* are the means for God-not separate nor with a life apart from
His. His Life is manifest in you who are His Son. Each aspect of Himself
is framed in holiness and perfect purity, in love celestial and so
complete it wishes only that it may release all that it looks upon unto
itself. Its radiance shines through each body that it looks upon and
brushes all its darkness into light merely by looking past it *to* the
light. The veil is lifted through its gentleness, and nothing hides the
face of Christ from its beholders. And both of you stand there, before
Him now, to let Him draw aside the veil that seems to keep you separate
and apart.

^8^ Since you *believe* that you are separate, Heaven presents itself to
you as separate too. Not that it is in truth, but that the link that has
been given you to join the truth may reach to you through what you
understand. Father and Son and Holy Spirit are as One, as all your
brothers join as one in truth. Christ and His Father never have been
separate, and Christ abides within your understanding in the part of you
that shares His Father's Will. The Holy Spirit links the other part, the
tiny mad desire to be separate, different, and special, to the Christ,
to make the oneness clear to what is *really* one. In this world, this
is not understood but *can* be taught.

^9^ The Holy Spirit serves Christ's purpose in your mind, so that the
aim of specialness can be corrected where the error lies. Because His
purpose still is one with both the Father and the Son, He knows the Will
of God and what *you* really will. But this is understood by mind
perceived as one, aware that it is one and so *experienced*. It is the
Holy Spirit's function to teach you *how* this oneness is experienced,
*what* you must do that it can be experienced, and *where* you should go
to do it.

^10^ All this takes note of time and place as if they were discrete, for
while you think that part of you is separate, the concept of a oneness
joined as one is meaningless. It is apparent that a mind so split could
never be the teacher of a Oneness which unites all things within itself.
And so What *is* within this mind and *does* unite all things together
must be its Teacher. Yet must It use the language which this mind can
understand in the condition in which it thinks it is. And It must use
all learning to transfer illusions to the truth, taking all false ideas
of what you are and leading you beyond them to the truth that *is*
beyond them. All this can very simply be reduced to this:

^11^ What is the same can not be different,? And what is one can not
have separate parts.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Savior from the Dark**](#part0004.html#level-206) {#part0030_split_002.html#h1-206 .level1a}

^12^ Is it not evident that what the body's eyes perceive fills you with
fear? Perhaps you think you find a hope of satisfaction there. Perhaps
you fancy to attain some peace and satisfaction in the world as you
perceive it. Yet it must be evident the outcome does not change. Despite
your hopes and fancies, *always* does despair result. And there is no
exception, nor will there ever be. The only value that the past can hold
is that you learn it gave you no rewards which you would want to keep.
For only thus will you be willing to relinquish it and have it gone
forever.

^13^ Is it not strange that you should cherish still some hope of
satisfaction from the world you see? In no respect at any time or place
has anything but fear and guilt been your reward. How long is needed for
you to realize the chance of change in *this* respect is hardly worth
delaying change that might result in better outcome? For one thing is
sure-the way you see, and long have seen, gives no support to base your
future hopes and no suggestions of success at all. To place your hopes
where no hope lies *must* make you hopeless. Yet is this hopelessness
your choice, while you would seek for hope where none is ever found.

^14^ Is it not also true that you have found some hope *apart* from
this-some glimmering, inconstant, wavering, yet dimly seen, that
hopefulness is warranted on grounds that are not in this world? And yet
your hope that they may still be here prevents you still from giving up
the hopeless and unrewarding task you set yourself. Can it make sense to
hold the fixed belief that there is reason to uphold pursuit of what has
always failed on grounds that it will suddenly succeed and bring what it
has never brought before?

^15^ Its past *has* failed. Be glad that it is gone within your mind to
darken what is there. Take not the form for content, for the form is but
a *means* for content. And the frame is but a means to hold the picture
up so that it can be seen. A frame that hides the picture has no
purpose. It cannot *be* a frame if it is what you see. Without the
picture is the frame without its meaning. Its *purpose* is to set the
picture off and not itself.

^16^ Who hangs an empty frame upon a wall and stands before it, deep in
reverence, as if a masterpiece were there to see? Yet if you see your
brother as a body, it *is* but this you do. The masterpiece that God has
set within this frame is all there is to see. The body holds it for a
while without obscuring it in any way. Yet what God has created needs no
frame, for what He has created He supports and frames within Himself.
His masterpiece He offers you to see. And would you rather see the frame
*instead* of this? And see the picture not at all?

^17^ The Holy Spirit is the frame God set around the part of Him that
you would see as separate. Yet its frame is joined to its Creator, one
with Him and with His masterpiece. This is its purpose, and you do not
make the frame into the picture when you choose to see it in its place.
The frame that God has given it but serves His purpose, not yours apart
from His. It is your *separate* purpose that obscures the picture and
cherishes the frame instead of it. Yet God has set His masterpiece
within a frame that will endure forever when yours has crumbled into
dust. But think you not the picture is destroyed in any way. What God
creates is safe from all corruption, unchanged and perfect in eternity.

^18^ Accept God's frame instead of yours, and you will see the
masterpiece. Look at its loveliness, and understand the Mind that
thought it, not in flesh and bones, but in a frame as lovely as Itself.
Its holiness lights up the sinlessness the frame of darkness hides and
casts a veil of light across the picture's face, which but reflects the
light that shines from it to its Creator. Think not this face was ever
darkened because you saw it in a frame of death. God kept it safe that
you might look on it and see the holiness that He has given it.

^19^ Within the darkness, see the savior *from* the dark and understand
your brother as his Father's Mind shows him to you. He will step forth
from darkness as you look on him, and you will see the dark no more. The
darkness touched him not, nor you who brought him forth for you to look
upon. His sinlessness but pictures yours. His gentleness becomes your
strength, and both will gladly look within and see the holiness that
must be there *because* of what you looked upon in him. He is the frame
in which your holiness is set, and what God gave him must be given you.
However much he overlooks the masterpiece in him and sees only a frame
of darkness, it is still your only function to behold in him what he
sees not. And in this seeing is the vision shared that looks on Christ
*instead* of seeing death.

^20^ How could the Lord of Heaven not be glad if you appreciate His
masterpiece? What could He do but offer thanks to you who love His Son
as He does? Would He not make known to you His love if you but share His
praise of what He loves? God cherishes creation as the perfect Father
that He is. And so His joy is made complete when any part of Him joins
in His praise, to share His joy. This brother is His perfect gift to
you. And He is glad and thankful when you thank His perfect Son for
being what he is. And all His thanks and gladness shine on you who would
complete His joy along with Him. And thus is *yours* completed. Not one
ray of darkness can be seen by those who will to make their Father's
happiness complete and theirs along with His. The gratitude of God
Himself is freely offered to everyone who shares His purpose. It is not
His Will to be alone. And neither is it yours.

^21^ Forgive your brother, and you cannot separate yourself from him nor
from his Father. You *need* no forgiveness, for the wholly pure have
never sinned. Give then what He has given you that you may see His Son
as one and thank his Father as He thanks you. Nor believe that all His
praise is given not to you. For what you give is His, and giving it you
learn to understand His gift to you. And give the Holy Spirit what He
offers unto the Father and the Son alike. Nothing has power over you
except His Will and yours, who but extend His Will. It was for this you
were created and your brother with you and at one with you.

^22^ You are the same, as God Himself is one and not divided in His
Will. And you must have one purpose, since He gave the same to both of
you. His Will is brought together as you join in will that you be made
complete by offering completion to your brother. See not in him the
sinfulness he sees, but give him honor that you may esteem yourself and
him. To each of you is given the power of salvation that escape from
darkness into light be yours to share; that you may see as one what
never has been separate nor apart from all God's love as given equally.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Fundamental Law of Perception**](#part0004.html#level-207) {#part0030_split_003.html#h1-207 .level1a}

^23^ To the extent to which you value guilt, to that extent will you
perceive a world in which attack is justified. To the extent to which
you recognize that guilt is meaningless, to that extent will you
perceive attack cannot *be* justified. This is in strict accord with
vision's fundamental law: you see what you believe is there, and you
believe it there because you *want* it there. Perception has no other
law than this. The rest but stems from this, to hold it up and offer it
support. This is perception's form adapted to this world of God's more
basic law that love creates itself and nothing *but* itself.

^24^ God's laws do not obtain directly to a world perception rules, for
such a world could not have been created by the Mind to which perception
has no meaning. Yet are His laws reflected everywhere. Not that the
world where this reflection is, is real at all. Only because His Son
believes it is, and from His Son's belief He could not let Himself be
separate entirely. He could not enter His Son's insanity with him, but
He could be sure His sanity went there with him so he could not be lost
forever in the madness of his wish.

^25^ Perception rests on choosing; knowledge does not. Knowledge has but
one law because it has but one Creator. But this world has two who made
it, and they do not see it as the same. To each it has a different
purpose, and to each it is a perfect means to serve the goal for which
it is perceived. For specialness it is the perfect frame to set it
off-the perfect battleground to wage its wars, the perfect shelter for
the illusions which it would make real. Not one but it upholds in its
perception; not one but can be fully justified.

^26^ There is another Maker of the world, the simultaneous Corrector of
the mad belief that anything could be established and maintained without
some link that kept it still within the laws of God; not as the law
itself upholds the universe as God created it, but in some form adapted
to the need the Son of God believes he has. Corrected error is the
error's end. And thus has God protected still His Son, even in error.
There is another purpose in the world that error made because it has
another Maker Who can reconcile its goal with His Creator's purpose. In
His perception of the world, nothing is seen but justifies forgiveness
and the sight of perfect sinlessness. Nothing arises but is met with
instant and complete forgiveness.

^27^ Nothing remains an instant to obscure the sinlessness that shines
unchanged beyond the pitiful attempts of specialness to put it out of
mind where it must be and light the body up *instead* of it. The lamps
of Heaven are not for it to choose to see them where it will. If it
elects to see them elsewhere from their home, as if they lit a place
where they could never be, and *you* agree, then must the Maker of the
world correct your error, lest you remain in darkness where the lamps
are not. Everyone here has entered darkness, yet no one has entered it
alone. For he has come with Heaven's Help within him ready to lead him
*out* of darkness into light at any time.

^28^ The time he chooses *can* be any time, for help is there, awaiting
but his choice. And when he chooses to avail himself of what is given
him, then will he see each situation that he thought before was means to
justify his anger turned to an event which justifies his love. He will
hear plainly that the calls to war he heard before are really calls to
peace. He will perceive that where he gave attack is but another altar
where he can with equal ease and far more happiness bestow forgiveness.
And he will reinterpret all temptation as just another chance to bring
him joy. How can a misperception be a sin? Let all your brother's errors
be to you nothing except a chance for you to see the workings of the
Helper given you to see the world He made, instead of yours.

^29^ What then *is* justified? What do you *want*? For these two
questions are the same. And when you see them *as* the same, your choice
is made. For it is seeing them as one that brings release from the
belief there *are* two ways to see. This world has much to offer to your
peace and many chances to extend your own forgiveness. Such its purpose
is to those who *want* to see peace and forgiveness descend on them and
offer them the light.

^30^ The Maker of the world of gentleness has perfect power to offset
the world of violence and hate that seems to stand between you and His
gentleness. It is not there in His forgiving eyes. And therefore it need
not be there in yours. Sin is the fixed belief perception *cannot*
change. What has been damned is damned and damned forever, being forever
unforgivable. If then it *is* forgiven, sin's perception must have been
wrong. And thus is change made possible. The Holy Spirit too sees what
He sees as far beyond the chance of change. But on His vision sin cannot
encroach, for sin has been *corrected* by His sight. And thus it must
have been an error, not a sin. For what it claimed could never be has
been. Sin is attacked by punishment and so preserved. But to forgive it
is to change its state from error into truth.

^31^ The Son of God could never sin, but he *can* wish for what would
hurt him. And he *has* the power to think he can be hurt. What could
this be except a misperception of himself? Is this a sin or a mistake,
forgivable or not? Does he need help or condemnation? Is it your purpose
that he be saved or damned? Forgetting not that what he is to you will
make this choice *your* future? For you make it *now*, the instant when
all time becomes a means to reach a goal. Make then your choice. But
recognize that *in* this choice the purpose of the world you see is
chosen and *will* be justified.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Joining of Minds**](#part0004.html#level-208) {#part0030_split_004.html#h1-208 .level1a}

^32^ Minds that are joined and *recognize* they are can feel no guilt.
For they cannot attack, and they rejoice that this is so, seeing their
safety in this happy fact. Their joy is in the innocence they see. And
thus they seek for it because it is their purpose to behold it and
rejoice. Everyone seeks for what will bring him joy as he defines it. It
is not the aim as such that varies. Yet it is the way in which the aim
is *seen* that makes the choice of means inevitable and beyond the hope
of change unless the aim is changed. And then the means are chosen once
again, as what will bring rejoicing is defined another way and sought
for differently.

^33^ Perception's basic law could thus be said, "You will rejoice at
what you see because you *see* it to rejoice." And while you think that
suffering and sin will bring you joy, so long will they be there for you
to see. Nothing is harmful or beneficent apart from what you wish. It is
your wish that makes it what it is in its effects on you. Because you
*chose* it as a means to gain these same effects, believing them to be
the bringers of rejoicing and of joy. Even in Heaven does this law
obtain. The Son of God creates to bring him joy, sharing his Father's
purpose in his own creation that his joy might be increased and God's
along with his.

^34^ You makers of a world that is not so, take rest and comfort in
another world where peace abides. This world you bring with you to all
the weary eyes and tired hearts that look on sin and beat its sad
refrain. From you can come their rest. From you can rise a world they
will rejoice to look upon and where their hearts are glad. In you there
is a vision which extends to all of them and covers them in gentleness
and light. And in this widening world of light, the darkness that they
thought was there is pushed away until it is but distant shadows, far
away, not long to be remembered as the sun shines them to nothingness.
And all their "evil" thoughts and "sinful" hopes, their dreams of guilt
and merciless revenge, and every wish to hurt and kill and die will
disappear before the sun you bring.

^35^ Would you not do this for the love of God? And for *yourself*? For
think what it would do for you. Your "evil" thoughts that haunt you now
will seem increasingly remote and far away from you. And they go farther
and farther off because the sun in you has risen that they may be pushed
away before the light. They linger for a while, a *little* while, in
twisted forms too far away for recognition and are gone forever. And in
the sunlight you will stand in quiet, in innocence, and wholly unafraid.
And from you will the rest you found extend, so that your peace can
never fall away and leave you homeless. Those who offer peace to
everyone have found a home in Heaven the world cannot destroy. For it is
large enough to hold the world within its peace.

^36^ In you is all of Heaven. Every leaf that falls is given life in
you. Each bird that ever sang will sing again in you. And every flower
that ever bloomed has saved its perfume and its loveliness for you. What
aim can supersede the Will of God and of His Son that Heaven be restored
to him for whom it was created as his only home? Nothing before and
nothing after it. No other place, no other state nor time. Nothing
beyond nor nearer. Nothing else. In any form. This can you bring to all
the world and all the thoughts that entered it and were mistaken for a
little while. How better could your own mistakes be brought to truth
than by your willingness to bring the light of Heaven with you as you
walk beyond the world of darkness into light?
:::

[]{#part0030_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The State of Sinlessness**](#part0004.html#level-209) {#part0030_split_005.html#h1-209 .level1a}

^37^ The state of sinlessness is merely this: the whole desire to attack
is gone, and so there is no reason to perceive the Son of God as other
than he is. The need for guilt is gone because it has no purpose and is
meaningless without the goal of sin. Attack and sin are bound as one
illusion, each the cause and aim and justifier of the other. Each is
meaningless alone, but seems to draw a meaning from the other. Each
depends upon the other for whatever sense it seems to have. And no one
could believe in one unless the other were the truth, for each attests
the other *must* be true.

^38^ Attack makes Christ your enemy and God along with Him. Must you not
be afraid with "enemies" like these? And must you not be fearful of
*yourself*? For you have hurt yourself and made your Self your "enemy."
And now you must believe you are not you but something alien to yourself
and "something else," a "something" to be feared instead of loved. Who
would attack whatever he perceives as wholly innocent? And who,
*because* he wishes to attack, can fail to think it must be guilty to
deserve the wish and leave him innocent? And who would see the Son of
God as innocent and wish him dead? Christ stands before you both each
time you look on one another. He has not gone because your eyes are
closed. But what is there to see by searching for your savior, seeing
Him through sightless eyes?

^39^ It is not Christ you see by looking thus. It is the "enemy"
confused with Christ you look upon. And hate because there is no sin in
him for you to see. Nor do you hear his plaintive call, unchanged in
content in whatever form the call is made, that you unite with him and
join with him in innocence and peace. And yet beneath the ego's
senseless shrieks, such *is* the call that God has given him that you
might hear in him His Call to you and answer by returning unto God what
is His own.

^40^ The Son of God asks only this of you-that you return to him what is
his due that you may *share* in it with him. Alone does neither have it.
So must it remain useless to both. Together, it will give to each an
equal strength to save the other and save himself along with him.
Forgiven by you, your savior offers you salvation. Condemned by you, he
offers death to you. In everyone you see but the reflection of what you
chose to have him be to you. If you decide against his proper function,
the only one he has in truth, you are depriving him of all the joy he
would have found if he fulfilled the role God gave to him. But think not
Heaven is lost to him alone. Nor can it be regained unless the way is
shown to him through you that you may find it, walking by his side.

^41^ It is no sacrifice that he be saved, for by his freedom will you
gain your own. To let his function be fulfilled is but the means to let
yours be. And so you walk toward Heaven or toward hell, but not alone.
How beautiful his sinlessness will be when you perceive it! And how
great will be your joy, when he is free to offer you the gift of sight
God gave to him for you! He has no need but this-that you allow him
freedom to complete the task God gave to him. Remembering but this-that
what he does you do along with him. And as you see him, so do you define
the function he will have for you until you see him differently and
*let* him be what God appointed that he be to you.

^42^ Against the hatred that the Son of God may cherish toward himself
is God believed to be without the power to save what He created from the
pain of hell. But in the love he shows himself is God made free to *let*
His Will be done. In each of you, you see the picture of your own belief
in what the Will of God must be for you. In your forgiveness will you
understand His love for you; through your attack believe He hates you,
thinking Heaven must be hell. Look once again upon your brother, not
without the understanding that he is the way to Heaven or to hell as you
perceive him. But forget not this-the role you give to him is given
*you*, and you *will* walk the way you pointed out to him because it is
your judgment on yourself.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Special Function**](#part0004.html#level-210) {#part0030_split_006.html#h1-210 .level1a}

^43^ The grace of God rests gently on forgiving eyes, and everything
they look on speaks of Him to the beholder. He can see no evil, nothing
in the world to fear, and no one who is different from himself. And as
he loves them, so he looks upon himself with love and gentleness. He
would no more condemn himself for his mistakes than damn another. He is
not an arbiter of vengeance nor a punisher of sin. The kindness of his
sight rests on himself with all the tenderness it offers others. For he
would only heal and only bless. And being in accord with what God wills,
he has the power to heal and bless all those he looks on with the grace
of God upon his sight.

^44^ Eyes become used to darkness, and the light of brilliant day seems
painful to the eyes grown long accustomed to the dim effects perceived
at twilight. And they turn away from sunlight and the clarity it brings
to what they look upon. Dimness seems better-easier to see and better
recognized. Somehow, the vague and more obscure seems easier to look
upon; less painful to the eyes than what is wholly clear and
unambiguous. Yet this is not what eyes are *for*. And who can say that
he prefers the darkness and maintain he *wants* to see? The *wish* to
see calls down the grace of God upon your eyes and brings the gift of
light that makes sight possible.

^45^ Will you behold your brother? God is glad to have you look on him.
He does not will your savior be unrecognized by you. Nor does He will
that he remain without the function that He gave to him. Let him no more
be lonely, for the lonely ones are those who see no function in the
world for them to fill, no place where they are needed, and no aim which
only they can perfectly fulfill.

^46^ Such is the Holy Spirit's kind perception of specialness-His use of
what you made, to heal instead of harm. To each He gives a special
function in salvation he alone can fill-a part for only him. Nor is the
plan complete until he finds his special function and fulfills the part
assigned to him to make himself complete within a world where
incompletion rules.

^47^ Here, where the laws of God do not prevail in perfect form, can he
yet do *one* perfect thing and make *one* perfect choice. And by this
act of special faithfulness to one perceived as other than himself, he
learns the gift was given to himself, and so they *must* be one.
Forgiveness is the only function meaningful in time. It is the means the
Holy Spirit uses to translate specialness from sin into salvation.
Forgiveness is for all. But when it rests on all, it is complete and
every function of this world completed with it. Then is time no more.

^48^ Yet while in time, there is still much to do. And each must do what
is allotted him, for on his part does *all* the plan depend. He *has* a
special part in time, for so he chose, and choosing it, he made it for
himself. His wish was not denied but changed in form to let it serve his
brother *and* himself and thus become a means to save instead of lose.
Salvation is no more than a reminder this world is not your home; its
laws are not imposed on you; its values are not yours. \[And nothing
that you *think* you see in it is *really* there at all.\] And this is
seen and understood as each one takes his part in its undoing, as he did
in making it. He has the means for either, as he always did. The
specialness he chose to hurt himself did God appoint to be the means for
his salvation from the very instant that the choice was made. His
special sin was made his special grace. His special hate became his
special love.

^49^ The Holy Spirit *needs* your special function that His may be
fulfilled. Think not you lack a special value here. You wanted it, and
it *is* given you. All that you made can serve salvation easily and
well. The Son of God can make no choice the Holy Spirit cannot employ on
his behalf and *not* against himself. Only in darkness does your
specialness appear to be attack. In light, you see it as your *special
function* in the plan to save the Son of God from *all* attack and let
him understand that he is safe, as he has always been and will remain in
time and in eternity alike. This is the function given each of you for
one another. Take it gently then from one another's hand, and let
salvation be perfectly fulfilled in both of you. Do this *one* thing,
that everything be given you.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. Commuting the Sentence**](#part0004.html#level-211) {#part0030_split_007.html#h1-211 .level1a}

^50^ And if the Holy Spirit can commute each sentence that you laid upon
yourself into a blessing, then it cannot be a sin. Sin is the one thing
in all the world that *cannot* change. It is immutable. And on its
changelessness the world depends. The magic of the world can seem to
hide the pain of sin from sinners and deceive with glitter and with
guile. Yet each one knows the cost of sin is death. And so it *is.* For
sin is a *request* for death, a wish to make this world's foundation
sure as love, dependable as Heaven, and as strong as God Himself. The
world *is* safe from love to everyone who thinks sin possible. Nor
*will* it change. Yet *is* it possible what God created not should share
the attributes of His creation when it opposes it in every way?

^51^ It *cannot* be the "sinner's" wish for death is just as strong as
is God's Will for life. Nor can the basis of a world He did not make be
firm and sure as Heaven. How could it be that hell and Heaven are the
same? And is it possible that what He did not will cannot be changed?
What is immutable besides His Will? And what can share Its attributes
except Itself? What wish can rise against His Will and be immutable? If
you could realize *nothing* is changeless but the Will of God, this
course would not be difficult for you. For it is this that you do not
believe. Yet there is nothing else you *could* believe if you but looked
at what it really is.

^52^ Let us go back to what we said before and think of it more
carefully. It must be so that either God is mad or is this world a place
of madness. Not one Thought of His makes any sense at all within this
world. And nothing that the world believes as true has any meaning in
His Mind at all. What makes no sense and has no meaning *is* insanity.
And what is madness *cannot* be the truth. If one belief so deeply
valued here were true, then every Thought God ever had is an illusion.
And if but one Thought of His is true, then all beliefs the world gives
any meaning to are false and make no sense at all. This *is* the choice
you make. Do not attempt to see it differently nor twist it into
something it is not. For only this decision *can* you make. The rest is
up to God and not to you.

^53^ To justify one value that the world upholds is to deny your
Father's sanity and *yours*. For God and His beloved Son do not think
differently. And it is the agreement of their thought that makes the Son
a co-creator with the Mind Whose Thought created him. And if he chooses
to believe one thought opposed to truth, he has decided he is not his
Father's Son because the Son is mad, and sanity must lie apart from both
the Father *and* the Son. This you *believe.* Think not that this belief
depends upon the form it takes. Who thinks the world is sane in *any*
way, is justified in *anything* it thinks, or is maintained by *any*
form of reason believes this to be true. Sin is not real *because* the
Father and the Son are not insane. This world is meaningless *because*
it rests on sin. Who could create the changeless if it does not rest on
truth?

^54^ The Holy Spirit has the power to change the whole foundation of the
world you see to something else-a basis not insane on which a sane
perception can be based, another world perceived. And one in which
nothing is contradicted that would lead the Son of God to sanity and
joy. Nothing attests to death and cruelty, to separation, and to
differences. For here is everything perceived as one, and no one loses
that each one may gain.

^55^ Test everything that you believe against this *one* requirement.
And understand that everything that meets this one demand is worthy of
your faith. But nothing else. What is not love is sin, and either one
perceives the other as insane and meaningless. Love is the basis for a
world perceived as wholly mad to sinners who believe theirs is the way
to sanity. But sin is equally insane within the sight of love, whose
gentle eyes would look beyond the madness and rest peacefully on truth.
Each sees a world immutable, as each defines the changeless and eternal
truth of what you are. And each reflects a view of what the Father and
the Son must be to make that viewpoint meaningful and sane.

^56^ Your special function is the special form in which the fact that
God is not insane appears most sensible and meaningful to you. The
content is the same. The form is suited to your special needs and to the
special time and place in which you think you find yourself and where
you can be free of place and time and all that you believe must limit
you. The Son of God cannot be bound by time nor place nor anything God
did not will. Yet if His Will is seen as madness, then the form of
sanity which makes it most acceptable to those who are insane requires
special choice. Nor can this choice be made *by* the insane, whose
problem is their choices are not free and made with reason in the light
of sense.

^57^ It *would* be madness to entrust salvation to the insane. Because
He is *not* mad has God appointed One as sane as He to raise a saner
world to meet the sight of everyone who chose insanity as his salvation.
To this One is given the choice of form most suitable to him; one which
will not attack the world he sees, but enter into it in quietness and
*show* him he is mad. This One but points to an alternative, *another*
way of looking at what he has seen before and recognizes as the world in
which he lives and thought he understood before.

^58^ Now *must* he question this because the form of the alternative is
one which he cannot deny nor overlook nor fail completely to perceive at
all. To each his special function is designed to be perceived as
possible and more and more desired as it *proves* to him that it is an
alternative he really *wants.* From this position does his sinfulness
and all the sin he sees within the world offer him less and less. Until
he comes to understand it *cost* him his sanity and stands between him
and whatever hope he has of *being* sane. Nor is he left without escape
from madness, for he has a special part in everyone's escape. He can no
more be left outside without a special function in the hope of peace
than could the Father overlook His Son and pass him by in careless
thoughtlessness.

^59^ What is dependable *except* God's Love? And where does sanity abide
*except* in Him? The One Who speaks for Him can show you this in the
alternative He chose especially for you. It is God's Will that you
remember this and so emerge from deepest mourning into perfect joy.
Accept the function that has been assigned to you in God's Own plan to
show His Sons that hell and Heaven are different, *not* the same. And
that in Heaven *they* are all the same, without the differences which
would have made a hell of Heaven and a heaven of hell, had such insanity
been possible.

^60^ The whole belief that someone loses but reflects the underlying
tenet God must be insane. For in this world, it seems that one must gain
*because* another lost. If *this* were true, then God is mad indeed! But
what is this belief except a form of the more basic tenet, "Sin is real
and rules the world"? For every little gain must someone lose and pay
exact amount in blood and suffering. For otherwise would evil triumph
and destruction be the total cost of any gain at all. You who believe
that God is mad, look carefully at this and understand that it must be
that either God or *this* must be insane, but hardly both.

^61^ Salvation is rebirth of the idea no one *can* lose for anyone to
gain. And everyone *must* gain if anyone would be a gainer. Here is
sanity restored. And on this single rock of truth can faith in God's
eternal saneness rest in perfect confidence and perfect peace. Reason is
satisfied, for all insane beliefs can be corrected here. And sin *must*
be impossible if *this* is true. This is the rock on which salvation
rests, the vantage point from which the Holy Spirit gives meaning and
direction to the plan in which your special function has a part. For
here your special function is made whole because it shares the
*function* of the whole.

^62^ Remember all temptation is but this-a mad belief that God's
insanity would make you sane and give you what you want. That either God
or you must lose to madness because your aims *can not* be reconciled.
Death demands life, but life is not maintained at any cost. No one can
suffer for the Will of God to be fulfilled. Salvation is His Will
*because* you share it. Not for you alone but for the Self which is the
Son of God. He *cannot* lose, for if he could, the loss would be his
Father's, and in Him no loss is possible. And this is sane *because* it
is the truth.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Principle of Salvation**](#part0004.html#level-212) {#part0030_split_008.html#h1-212 .level1a}

^63^ The Holy Spirit can use all that you give to Him for your
salvation. But He cannot use what you withhold, for He cannot take it
from you without your willingness. For if He did, you would believe He
wrested it from you against your will. And so you would not learn it
*is* your will to be without it. You need not give it to Him wholly
willingly, for if you could, you'd have no need of Him. But this He
needs-that you prefer He take it than that you keep it for yourself
alone and recognize that what brings loss to no one you would not know.
This much is necessary to add to the idea no one can lose for you to
gain. And nothing more.

^64^ Here is the only principle salvation needs. Nor is it necessary
that your faith in it be strong, unswerving, and without attack from all
beliefs opposed to it. You *have* no fixed allegiance. But remember
salvation is not needed by the saved. You are not called upon to do what
one divided still against himself would find impossible. Have little
faith that wisdom could be found in such a state of mind. But be you
thankful that only little faith is *asked* of you. What *but* a little
faith remains to those who still believe in sin? What could they know of
Heaven and the justice of the saved?

^65^ There is a kind of justice in salvation of which the world knows
nothing. To the world, justice and *vengeance* are the same, for sinners
see justice only as their punishment, perhaps sustained by someone else
but not escaped. The laws of sin *demand* a victim. Who it may be makes
little difference. But death must be the cost and must be paid. This is
not justice but insanity. Yet how could justice be defined without
insanity where love means hate and death is seen as victory and triumph
over eternity and timelessness and life?

^66^ You who know not of justice still can ask and learn the answer.
Justice looks on all in the same way. It is not just that one should
lack for what another has. For that is vengeance in whatever form it
takes. Justice demands *no* sacrifice, for any sacrifice is made that
sin may be preserved and kept. It is a payment offered for the cost of
sin, but not the total cost. The rest is taken from another, to be laid
beside your little payment to "atone" for all that you would keep and
not give up. So is the victim seen as partly you, with someone else by
far the greater part. And in the total cost, the greater his, the less
is yours. And justice, being blind, is satisfied by being paid, it
matters not by whom. Can this *be* justice? God knows not of this. But
justice *does* He know and knows it well. For He is wholly fair to
everyone.

^67^ Vengeance is alien to God's Mind *because* He knows of justice. To
be just is to be fair and *not* be vengeful. Fairness and vengeance are
impossible, for each one contradicts the other and denies that it is
real. It is impossible for you to share the Holy Spirit's justice with a
mind that can conceive of specialness at all. Yet how could He be just
if He condemns a sinner for the crimes he did not do but *thinks* he
did? And where would justice be if He demanded of the ones obsessed with
the idea of punishment that they lay it aside unaided and perceive it is
not true? It is extremely hard for those who still believe sin
meaningful to understand the Holy Spirit's justice.

^68^ They *must* believe He shares their own confusion and cannot avoid
the vengeance that their own belief in justice must entail. And so they
fear the Holy Spirit and perceive the "wrath" of God in Him. Nor can
they trust Him not to strike them dead with lightning bolts torn from
the "fires" of Heaven by God's own angry hand. They *do* believe that
Heaven is hell and *are* afraid of love. And deep suspicion and the
chill of fear comes over them when they are told that they have never
sinned. Their world depends on sin's stability. And they perceive the
"threat" of what God knows as justice to be more destructive to
themselves and to their world than vengeance, which they understand and
love.

^69^ So do they think the loss of sin a curse. And flee the Holy Spirit
as if He were a messenger from hell sent from above in treachery and
guile to work God's vengeance on them in the guise of a deliverer and
friend. What could He be to them except a devil dressed to deceive
within an angel's cloak. And what escape has He for them except a door
to hell that seems to look like Heaven's gate?

^70^ Yet justice cannot punish those who ask for punishment but have a
Judge Who knows that they are wholly innocent in truth. In justice, He
is bound to set them free and give them all the honor they deserve and
have denied themselves because they are not fair and cannot understand
that they are innocent. Love is not understandable to sinners because
they think that justice is split off from love and stands for something
else.

^71^ And thus is love perceived as weak and vengeance strong. For love
has *lost* when judgment left its side and is too weak to save from
punishment. But vengeance without love has *gained* in strength by being
separate and apart from love. And what but vengeance now can help and
save, while love stands feebly by with helpless hands, bereft of justice
and vitality and powerless to save? What can Love ask of you who think
that all of this is true? Could He, in justice and in love believe in
your confusion you have much to give? You are not asked to trust Him
far. No further than what you see He offers you and what you recognize
you could not give yourself.

^72^ In God's own justice does He recognize all you deserve but
understands as well that you cannot accept it for yourself. It is His
special function to hold out to you the gifts the innocent *deserve.*
And every one that you accept brings joy to Him as well as you. He knows
that Heaven is richer made by each one you accept. And God rejoices as
His Son receives what loving justice knows to be his due. For love and
justice are *not* different. *Because* they are the same does mercy
stand at God's right hand and give the Son of God the power to forgive
*himself* of sin.

^73^ To him who merits everything, how can it be that anything be kept
from him? For that would be injustice and unfair indeed to all the
holiness that is in him, however much he recognize it not. God knows of
no injustice. He would not allow His Son be judged by those who seek his
death and could not see his worth at all. What honest witnesses could
they call forth to speak on his behalf? And who would come to plead for
him and not against his life? No justice would be given him by you. Yet
God ensured that justice *would* be done unto the Son He loves and would
protect from all unfairness you might seek to offer, believing vengeance
*is* his proper due.

^74^ As specialness cares not who pays the cost of sin, so it be paid,
the Holy Spirit heeds not who looks on innocence at last, provided it is
seen and recognized. For just *one* witness is enough if he sees truly.
Simple justice asks no more. Of each one does the Holy Spirit ask if he
will be that one, so justice may return to love and there be satisfied.
Each special function He allots is but for this-that each one learn that
love and justice are not separate. And both are strengthened by their
union with each other. Without love is justice prejudiced and weak. And
love without justice is impossible. For love is fair and cannot chasten
without cause. What cause can *be* to warrant an attack upon the
innocent? In justice then does love correct mistakes, but not in
vengeance. For that would be unjust to innocence.

^75^ You can be perfect witness to the power of love *and* justice if
you understand it is impossible the Son of God could merit vengeance.
You need not perceive in every circumstance that this is true. Nor need
you look to your experience within the world, which is but shadows of
all that is *really* happening within yourself. The understanding which
you need comes not of you but from a larger Self, so great and holy that
He could not doubt His innocence. Your special function is a call to Him
that He may smile on you whose sinlessness He shares. *His*
understanding will be *yours.* And so the Holy Spirit's special function
has been fulfilled. God's Son has found a witness unto his sinlessness
and not his sin. How little need you give the Holy Spirit that simple
justice may be given you!

^76^ Without impartiality there is no justice. How can specialness be
just? Judge not because you cannot, not because you are a miserable
sinner too. How can the special *really* understand that justice is the
same for everyone? To take from one to give another must be an injustice
to them both, since they are equal in the Holy Spirit's sight. Their
Father gave the same inheritance to both. Who would have more or less is
not aware that he has everything. He is no judge of what must be
another's due, because he thinks *he* is deprived. And so must he be
envious and try to take away from whom he judges. He is not impartial
and cannot fairly see another's rights because his own have been
obscured to him.

^77^ You have the *right* to all the universe-to perfect peace, complete
deliverance from all effects of sin, and to the life eternal, joyous and
complete in every way, as God appointed for His holy Son. This is the
only justice Heaven knows, and all the Holy Spirit brings to earth. Your
special function shows you nothing else but perfect justice *can*
prevail for you. And you are safe from vengeance in all forms. The world
deceives, but it cannot replace God's justice with a version of its own.
For only love *is* just and *can* perceive what justice must accord the
Son of God. Let love decide and never fear that you in your unfairness
will deprive yourself of what God's justice has allotted you.
:::

[]{#part0030_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Justice of Heaven**](#part0004.html#level-213) {#part0030_split_009.html#h1-213 .level1a}

^78^ What can it be but arrogance to think your little errors cannot be
undone by Heaven's justice? And what could this mean except that they
are sins and not mistakes, forever uncorrectable, and to be met with
vengeance not with justice? Are you willing to be released from all
effects of sin? You cannot answer this until you see all that the answer
must entail. For if you answer "yes," it means you will forego all
values of this world in favor of the peace of Heaven. Not *one* sin
would you retain. And not *one* doubt that this is possible will you
hold dear that sin be kept in place. You mean that truth has greater
value now than *all* illusions. And you recognize that truth must be
revealed to you because you know not what it is.

^79^ To give reluctantly is not to gain the gift because you are
reluctant to *accept* it. It is saved for you until reluctance to
receive it disappears, and you are willing it be given you. God's
justice warrants gratitude, not fear. Nothing you give is lost to you or
anyone, but cherished and preserved in Heaven, where all of the
treasures given to God's Son are kept for him and offered anyone who but
holds out his hand in willingness they be received. Nor is the treasure
less as it is given out. Each gift but *adds* to the supply. For God is
fair. He does not fight against His Son's reluctance to perceive
salvation as a gift from Him. Yet would His justice not be satisfied
until it is received by everyone.

^80^ Be certain any answer to a problem the Holy Spirit solves will
always be one in which no one loses. And this must be true because He
asks no sacrifice of anyone. An answer which demands the slightest loss
to anyone has not resolved the problem but has added to it and made it
greater, harder to resolve, and *more* unfair. It is impossible the Holy
Spirit could see unfairness as a resolution. To Him, what is unfair must
be corrected *because* it is unfair. And every error is a perception in
which one at least is seen unfairly. Thus is justice not accorded to the
Son of God. When anyone is seen as losing, he has been condemned. And
punishment becomes his due instead of justice.

^81^ The sight of innocence makes punishment impossible and justice
sure. The Holy Spirit's perception leaves no ground for an attack. Only
a *loss* could justify attack, and loss of any kind He cannot see. The
world solves problems in another way. It sees a resolution as a state in
which it is decided who shall win and who shall lose-how much the one
shall take and how much can the loser still defend.

^82^ Yet does the problem still remain unsolved, for *only* justice can
set up a state in which there is no loser, no one left unfairly treated
and deprived, and thus with grounds for vengeance. Problem solving
cannot be vengeance, which at best can bring another problem added to
the first, in which the murder is not obvious. The Holy Spirit's problem
solving is the way in which the problem *ends.* It has been solved
*because* it has been met with justice. Until it has, it will recur
because it has not yet been solved. The principle that justice means no
one can lose is crucial to this course. For miracles *depend* on
justice. Not as it is seen through this world's eyes, but as God knows
it, and as knowledge is reflected in the sight the Holy Spirit gives.

^83^ *No one* deserves to lose. And what would be unjust to him cannot
occur. Healing must be for everyone *because* he does not merit an
attack of any kind. What order can there be in miracles, unless someone
deserves to suffer more and others less? And *is* this justice to the
wholly innocent? A miracle *is* justice. It is not a special gift to
some to be withheld from others as less worthy, more condemned, and thus
apart from healing. Who is there who can be separate from salvation if
its *purpose* is the end of specialness? Where is salvation's justice if
some errors are unforgivable and warrant vengeance in place of healing
and return of peace?

^84^ Salvation cannot seek to help God's Son be more unfair than *he*
has sought to be. If miracles, the Holy Spirit's gift, were given
specially to an elect and special group and kept apart from others as
less deserving, then is He *ally* to specialness. What He cannot
perceive He bears no witness to. And everyone is equally entitled to His
gift of healing and deliverance and peace. To give a problem to the Holy
Spirit to solve for you means that you *want* it solved. To keep it for
yourself to solve without His help is to decide it should remain
unsettled, unresolved, and lasting in its power of injustice and attack.
No one *can* be unjust to you, unless you have decided first to *be*
unjust. And then must problems rise to block your way and peace be
scattered by the winds of hate.

^85^ Unless you think that all your brothers have an equal right to
miracles with you, you will not claim your right to them because you
were unjust to one with equal rights. Seek to deny, and you *will* feel
denied. Seek to deprive, and you *have* been deprived. A miracle can
*never* be received because another could receive it *not*. Only
forgiveness offers miracles. And pardon must be just to everyone.

^86^ The little problems that you keep and hide become your secret sins
because you did not choose to let them be removed for you. And so they
gather dust and grow until they cover everything that you perceive and
leave you fair to no one. Not one right do you believe you have. And
bitterness, with vengeance justified and mercy lost, condemns you as
unworthy of forgiveness. The unforgiven *have* no mercy to bestow upon
another. That is why your sole responsibility must be to take
forgiveness for yourself. The miracle that you receive you *give*. Each
one becomes an illustration of the law on which salvation rests-that
justice must be done to all if anyone is to be healed. No one can lose,
and everyone *must* benefit.

^87^ Each miracle is an example of what justice can accomplish when it
is offered to everyone alike. It is received and given equally. It is
awareness that giving and receiving are the same. Because it does not
make the same unlike, it sees no differences where none exist. And thus
it is the same for everyone because it sees no differences in *them.*
Its offering is universal, and it teaches but one message:

^88^ What is God's belongs to everyone and is his due.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 26**](#part0004.html#chap-26) {#part0031_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Transition**](#part0004.html#chap-26) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-214) {#part0031_split_000.html#h1-214 .level1a1}

^26:1^ In the "dynamics" of attack is sacrifice a key idea. It is the
pivot upon which *all* compromise, *all* desperate attempts to strike a
bargain, and all conflicts achieve a seeming balance. It is the symbol
of the central theme that *somebody must lose*. Its focus on the body is
apparent, for it is always an attempt to *limit loss*. The body is
itself a sacrifice-a giving up of power in the name of saving just a
little for yourself. To see a brother in another body separate from
yours is the expression of a wish to see a little part of him and
sacrifice the rest. Look at the world, and you will see nothing attached
to anything beyond itself. All seeming entities can come a little nearer
or go a little farther off but *cannot* join.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The "Sacrifice" of Oneness**](#part0004.html#level-215) {#part0031_split_001.html#h1-215 .level1a}

^2^ The world you see is based on "sacrifice" of oneness. It is a
picture of a complete disunity and total lack of joining. Around each
entity is built a wall so seeming solid that it looks as if what is
inside can never reach without, and what is out can never reach and join
with what is locked away within the wall. Each part must sacrifice the
other part to keep itself complete. For if they joined, each one would
lose its own identity, and by their separation are their selves
maintained.

^3^ The little that the body fences off *becomes* the self, preserved
through sacrifice of all the rest. And all the rest must *lose* this
little part, remaining incomplete to keep its own identity intact. In
this perception of yourself, the body's loss would be a sacrifice
indeed. For sight of bodies becomes the sign that sacrifice is limited
and something still remains for you alone. And for this little to belong
to you are limits placed on everything outside, just as they are on
everything you think is yours. For giving and receiving *are* the same.
And to accept the limits of a body is to impose these limits on each
brother whom you see. For you must see him as you see yourself.

^4^ The body *is* a loss and *can* be made to sacrifice. And while you
see your brother as a body, apart from you and separate in his cell, you
are demanding sacrifice of him *and* you. What greater sacrifice could
be demanded than that God's Son perceive himself without his Father? And
his Father be without His Son? Yet every sacrifice demands that they be
separate and without the other. The memory of God *must* be denied if
any sacrifice is asked of anyone. What witness to the wholeness of God's
Son is seen within a world of separate bodies, however much he witnesses
to truth? He is *invisible* in such a world. Nor can his song of union
and of love be heard at all. Yet is it given him to make the world
recede before his song and sight of him replace the body's eyes.

^5^ Those who would see the witnesses to truth instead of to illusion
merely ask that they might see a purpose in the world that gives it
sense and makes it meaningful. Without your special function *has* this
world no meaning for you. Yet it can become a treasure house as rich and
limitless as Heaven itself. No instant passes here in which your
brother's holiness cannot be seen, to add a limitless supply to every
meager scrap and tiny crumb of happiness that you allot yourself.

^6^ You *can* lose sight of oneness, but *can not* make sacrifice of its
reality. Nor can you *lose* what you would sacrifice nor keep the Holy
Spirit from His task of showing you that it has not been lost. Hear then
the song your brother sings to you. And let the world recede and take
the rest his witness offers on behalf of peace. But judge him not, for
you will hear no song of liberation for yourself nor see what it is
given him to witness to that you may see it and rejoice with him. Make
not his holiness a sacrifice to your belief in sin. You sacrifice *your*
innocence with his and die each time you see in him a sin deserving
death.

^7^ Yet every instant can you be reborn and given life again. His
holiness gives life to you, who cannot die because his sinlessness is
known to God and can no more be sacrificed by you than can the light in
you be blotted out because he sees it not. You who would make a
sacrifice of life and make your eyes and ears bear witness to the death
of God and of His holy Son, think not that you have power to make of
them what God willed not they be. In Heaven God's Son is not imprisoned
in a body nor is sacrificed in solitude to sin.

^8^ And as he is in Heaven, so must he be eternally and everywhere. He
is the same forever-born again each instant, untouched by time, and far
beyond the reach of any sacrifice of life or death. For neither did he
make, and only one was given him by One Who knows His gifts can never
suffer sacrifice and loss. God's justice rests in gentleness upon His
Son and keeps him safe from all injustice the world would lay upon him.
Could it be that *you* could make his sins reality and sacrifice his
Father's Will for him?

^9^ Condemn him not by seeing him within the rotting prison where he
sees himself. It is your special function to ensure the door be opened
that he may come forth to shine on you and give you back the gift of
freedom by receiving it of you. What is the Holy Spirit's special
function but to release the holy Son of God from the imprisonment he
made to *keep* himself from justice? Could your function be a task apart
and separate from His Own?
:::

[]{#part0031_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Forms of Error**](#part0004.html#level-216) {#part0031_split_002.html#h1-216 .level1a}

^10^ It is not difficult to understand the reasons why you do not ask
the Holy Spirit to solve *all* problems for you. He has not greater
difficulty in resolving some than others. Every problem is the same to
Him because each one is solved in just the *same* respect and through
the *same* approach. The aspects which need solving do not change,
whatever form the problem seems to take. A problem can appear in many
forms, and it will do so while the problem lasts. It serves no purpose
to attempt to solve it in a special form. It will recur and then recur
again and yet again until it has been answered for all time and will not
rise again in any form. And only then are you released from it.

^11^ The Holy Spirit offers you release from *every* problem that you
think you have. They are the same to Him because each one, regardless of
the form it seems to take, is a demand that someone suffer loss and make
a sacrifice that you might gain. And when the situation is worked out so
no one loses, is the problem gone because it was an error in perception
which now has been corrected. One mistake is not more difficult for Him
to bring to truth than is another. For there *is* but one mistake-the
whole idea that loss is possible and could result in gain for anyone. If
this were true, then God would be unfair, sin would be possible, attack
be justified, and vengeance fair.

^12^ This one mistake in any form has *one* correction. There *is* no
loss; to think there is, is a mistake. You *have* no problems, though
you think you have. And yet you could not think so if you saw them
vanish one by one without regard to size, complexity, or place and time,
or any attribute which you perceive that makes each one seem different
from the rest. Think not the limits you impose on what you see can limit
God in any way.

^13^ The miracle of justice can correct *all* errors. Every problem *is*
an error. It does injustice to the Son of God and therefore is not true.
The Holy Spirit does not evaluate injustices as great or small or more
or less. They have no properties to Him. They are mistakes from which
the Son of God is suffering, but needlessly. And so He takes the thorns
and nails away. He does not pause to judge whether the hurt be large or
little. He makes but one judgment-that to hurt God's Son *must* be
unfair and therefore is not so.

^14^ You who believe it safe to give but some mistakes to be corrected
while you keep the others to yourself, remember this: justice is total.
There is no such thing as partial justice. If the Son of God is guilty,
then is he condemned, and he deserves no mercy from the God of justice.
But ask not God to punish him because *you* find him guilty and would
have him die. God offers you the means to see his innocence. Would it be
fair to punish him because you will not look at what is there to see?
Each time you keep a problem for yourself to solve or judge that it is
one which has no resolution, you have made it great and past the hope of
healing. You deny the miracle of justice *can* be fair.

^15^ If God is just, then can there be no problems that justice cannot
solve. But you believe that some injustices are fair and good and
necessary to preserve yourself. It is these problems that you think are
great and cannot be resolved. For there are those you *want* to suffer
loss and no one whom you wish to be preserved from sacrifice entirely.
Consider once again your special function. *One* is given you to see in
him his perfect sinlessness. And you will ask no sacrifice of him
because you could not will he suffer loss. The miracle of justice you
call forth will rest on you as surely as on him. Nor will the Holy
Spirit be content until it is received by everyone. For what you give to
Him *is* everyone's, and by your giving it can He ensure that everyone
receives it equally.

^16^ Think then how great your own release will be when you are willing
to receive correction for all your problems. You will not keep one, for
pain in any form you will not want. And you will see each little hurt
resolved before the Holy Spirit's gentle sight. For all of them *are*
little in His sight and worth no more than just a tiny sigh before they
disappear, to be forever undone and unremembered. What seemed once to be
a special problem, a mistake without a remedy, or an affliction without
a cure, has been transformed into a universal blessing. Sacrifice is
gone. And in its place the love of God can be remembered and will shine
away all memory of sacrifice and loss.

^17^ God cannot be remembered until justice is loved instead of feared.
He cannot be unjust to anyone or anything because He knows that
everything that is belongs to Him and will forever be as He created it.
Nothing He loves but must be sinless and beyond attack. Your special
function opens wide the door beyond which is the memory of His love kept
perfectly intact and undefiled. And all you need to do is but to wish
that Heaven be given you instead of hell, and every bolt and barrier
that seems to hold the door securely barred and locked will merely fall
away and disappear. For it is not your Father's Will that you should
offer or receive less than He gave when He created you in perfect love.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Borderland**](#part0004.html#level-217) {#part0031_split_003.html#h1-217 .level1a}

^18^ Complexity is not of God. How could it be, when all He knows is
one? He knows of *one* creation, *one* reality, *one* truth, and but
*one* Son. Nothing conflicts with oneness. How, then, could there be
complexity in Him? What is there to decide? For it is conflict that
makes choice possible. The truth is simple-it is one, without an
opposite. And how could strife enter in its simple presence and bring
complexity where oneness is? The truth makes no decisions, for there is
nothing to decide *between*. And only if there were could choosing be a
necessary step in the advance toward oneness. What is everything leaves
room for nothing else.

^19^ Yet is this magnitude beyond the scope of this curriculum. Nor is
it necessary we dwell on anything that cannot be immediately grasped.
There is a borderland of thought which stands between this world and
Heaven. It is not a place, and when you reach it is apart from time.
Here is the meeting-place where thoughts are brought together-where
conflicting values meet and all illusions are laid down beside the truth
where they are judged to be untrue. This borderland is just beyond the
gate of Heaven. Here is every thought made pure and wholly simple. Here
*is* sin denied and everything that is received instead.

^20^ This is the journey's end. We have referred to it as the real
world. And yet there is a contradiction here in that the words imply a
limited reality, a partial truth, a segment of the universe made true.
This is because knowledge makes no attack upon perception. They are
brought together, and only one continues past the gate where Oneness is.
Salvation is a borderland where place and time and choice have meaning
still, and yet it can be seen that they are temporary, out of place, and
every choice has been already made.

^21^ Nothing the Son of God believes can be destroyed. But what is truth
to him must be brought to the last comparison that he will ever make,
the last evaluation that will be possible, the final judgment upon this
world. It is the judgment of the truth upon illusion, of knowledge on
perception-it has no meaning and does not exist. This is not your
decision. It is but a simple statement of a simple fact. But in this
world, there *are* no simple facts because what is the same and what is
different remain unclear. The one essential thing to make a choice at
all is this distinction. And herein lies the difference between the
worlds. In this one, choice is made impossible. In the real world is
choosing simplified.

^22^ Salvation stops just short of Heaven, for only perception needs
salvation. Heaven was never lost and so cannot be saved. Yet who can
make a choice between the wish for Heaven and the wish for hell unless
he recognizes they are *not* the same? This difference is the learning
goal this course has set. It will not go beyond this aim. Its only
purpose is to teach what is the same and what is different, leaving room
to make the only choice which *can* be made.

^23^ There is no basis for choice in this complex and over-complicated
world. For no one understands what is the same and seems to choose where
no choice really is. The real world is the area of choice made real, not
in the outcome but in the perception of *alternatives* for choice. That
there *is* choice is an illusion. Yet within this one lies the undoing
of *every* illusion, not excepting this.

^24^ Is not this like your special function, where the separation is
undone by change of purpose in what once was specialness and now is
union? *All* illusions are but one. And in the recognition this is so
lies the ability to give up all attempts to choose between them and to
*make* them different. \[How simple is the choice between two things so
clearly *un*alike.\] There *is* no conflict here. No sacrifice is
possible in the relinquishment of an illusion *recognized* as such.
Where all reality has been withdrawn from what was never true, can it be
hard to give it up and choose what *must* be true?
:::

[]{#part0031_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Where Sin has Left**](#part0004.html#level-218) {#part0031_split_004.html#h1-218 .level1a}

^25^ Forgiveness is this world's equivalent of Heaven's justice. It
translates the world of sin into a simple world where justice can be
reflected from beyond the gate behind which total lack of limits lies.
Nothing in boundless love could need forgiveness. And what is charity
within the world gives way to simple justice past the gate that opens
into Heaven. No one forgives unless he has believed in sin and still
believes that he has much to be forgiven. Forgiveness thus becomes the
means by which he learns he has done nothing to forgive. Forgiveness
always rests upon the one who offers it until he sees himself as needing
it no more. And thus is he returned to his real function of creating,
which his forgiveness offers him again.

^26^ Forgiveness turns the world of sin into a world of glory, wonderful
to see. Each flower shines in light, and every bird sings of the joy of
Heaven. There is no sadness, and there is no parting here, for
everything is totally forgiven. And what has been forgiven must join,
for nothing stands between to keep them separate and apart. The sinless
must perceive that they are one, for nothing stands between to push the
other off. And in the space which sin left vacant do they join as one,
in gladness recognizing what is part of them has not been kept apart and
separate.

^27^ The holy place on which you stand is but the space that sin has
left. And here you see the face of Christ arising in its place. Who
could behold the face of Christ and not recall His Father as He really
is? Who could fear love and stand upon the ground where sin has left a
place for Heaven's altar to rise and tower far above the world and reach
beyond the universe to touch the heart of all creation? What is Heaven
but a song of gratitude and love and praise by everything created to the
Source of its creation? The holiest of altars is set where once sin was
believed to be. And here does every light of heaven come to be rekindled
and increased in joy. For here is what was lost restored to them and all
their radiance made whole again.

^28^ Forgiveness brings no little miracles to lay before the gate of
Heaven. Here the Son of God Himself comes to receive each gift that
brings him nearer to his home. Not one is lost, and none is cherished
more than any other. Each reminds him of His Father's love as surely as
the rest. And each one teaches him that what he feared he loves the
most. What *but* a miracle could change his mind, so that he understands
that love cannot *be* feared? What other miracle is there but this? And
what else *need* there be to make the space between you disappear?

^29^ Where sin once was perceived will rise a world which will become an
altar to the truth, and *you* will join the lights of Heaven there and
sing their song of gratitude and praise. And as they come to you to be
complete, so will you go with them. For no one hears the song of Heaven
and remains without a voice that adds its power to the song and makes it
sweeter still. And each one joins the singing at the altar which was
raised within the tiny spot that sin proclaimed to be its own. And what
was tiny then has soared into a magnitude of song in which the universe
has joined with but a single voice. This tiny spot of sin that stands
between you still is holding back the happy opening of Heaven's gate.
How little is the hindrance which withholds the wealth of Heaven from
you! And how great will be the joy in Heaven when you join the mighty
chorus to the love of God!
:::

[]{#part0031_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Little Hindrance**](#part0004.html#level-219) {#part0031_split_005.html#h1-219 .level1a}

^30^ A little hindrance can seem large indeed to those who do not
understand that miracles are all the same. Yet teaching that is what
this course is *for*. This is its only purpose, for only that is all
there is to learn. And you can learn it many different ways. All
learning is a help or hindrance to the gate of Heaven. Nothing in
between is possible. There are two teachers only, who point in different
ways. And you will go along the way your chosen teacher leads. There are
but two directions you can take while time remains and choice is
meaningful. For never will another road be made except the way to
Heaven. You but choose whether to go *toward* Heaven or away to nowhere.
There *is* nothing else to choose.

^31^ Nothing is ever lost but time, which in the end is \[nothing\].
\[I\]t is but a little hindrance to eternity, quite meaningless to the
real Teacher of the world. Yet since you *do* believe in \[its
reality\], why should you waste it going nowhere when it *can* be used
to reach a goal as high as learning can achieve? Think not the way to
Heaven's gate is difficult at all. Nothing you undertake with certain
purpose and high resolve and happy confidence, holding each other's hand
and keeping step to Heaven's song, is difficult to do. But it is hard
indeed to wander off, alone and miserable, down a road which leads to
nothing and which has no purpose.

^32^ God gave His Teacher to replace the one you made, not to conflict
with it. And what He would replace has been replaced. Time lasted but an
instant in your mind, with no effect upon eternity. And so is all time
passed and everything exactly as it was before the way to nothingness
was made. The tiny tick of time in which the first mistake was made, and
all of them within that one mistake, held also the *correction* for that
one and all of them that came within the first. And in that tiny instant
time was gone, for that was all it ever was. What God gave answer to
*is* answered and is gone.

^33^ To you who still believe you live in time and know not it is gone,
the Holy Spirit still guides you through the infinitely small and
senseless maze you still perceive in time, though it has long since
gone. You think you live in what is past. Each thing you look upon you
saw but for an instant, long ago before its unreality gave way to truth.
Not one illusion still remains unanswered in your mind. Uncertainty was
brought to certainty so long ago that it is hard indeed to hold it to
your heart as if it were before you still.

^34^ The tiny instant you would keep and make eternal passed away in
Heaven too soon for anything to notice it had come. What disappeared too
quickly to affect the simple knowledge of the Son of God can hardly
still be there for you to choose to be your teacher. Only in the past-an
ancient past, too short to make a world in answer to creation-did this
world appear to rise. So very long ago, for such a tiny interval of time
that not one note in Heaven's song was missed.

^35^ Yet in each unforgiving act or thought, in every judgment, and in
all belief in sin, is that one instant still called back, as if it could
be made again in time. You keep an ancient memory before your eyes. And
he who lives in memories alone is unaware of where he is.

^35a^ \[Forgiveness is the great release from time. It is the key to
learning that the past is over. Madness speaks no more. There *is* no
other teacher and no *other* way. For what has been undone no longer is.
And who can stand upon a distant shore and dream himself across an ocean
to a place and time that have long since gone by? How *real* a hindrance
can this dream be to where he really *is*? For this is fact and does
*not* change whatever dreams he has. Yet can he still *imagine* he is
elsewhere and in another time. In the extreme, he can delude himself
that this is true and pass from mere imagining into belief and into
madness, quite convinced that where he would prefer to be, he *is*.\]

^36^ Is this a *hindrance* to the place whereon he stands? Is any echo
from the past that he may hear a fact in what is there to hear where he
is now? And how much can his own delusions about time and place affect a
change in where he really is? The unforgiven is a voice that calls out
from a past forever more gone by. And everything which points to it as
real is but a wish that what is gone could be made real again and seen
as here and now in place of what is *really* now and here. Is this a
hindrance to the truth the past is gone and cannot be returned to you?
And do you *want* that fearful instant kept, when Heaven seemed to
disappear and God was feared and made a symbol of your hate?

^37^ Forget the time of terror that has been so long ago corrected and
undone. Can sin withstand the Will of God? Can it be up to you to see
the past and put it in the present? You can *not* go back. And
everything that points the way in the direction of the past but sets you
on a mission whose accomplishment can only be unreal. Such is the
justice your ever-loving Father has ensured must come to you. And from
your own unfairness to yourself has He protected you. You *cannot* lose
your way because there is no way but His and nowhere can you go except
to Him.

^38^ Would God allow His Son to lose his way along a road long since a
memory of time gone by? \[This course will teach you only what is now.\]
A dreadful instant in a distant past, now perfectly corrected, is of no
concern nor value. Let the dead and gone be peacefully forgotten.
Resurrection has come to take its place. And now you are a part of
resurrection *not* of death. No past illusions have the power to keep
you in a place of death, a vault God's Son entered an instant, to be
instantly restored unto His Father's perfect Love. And how can he be
kept in chains long since removed and gone forever from his mind?

^39^ The Son that God created is as free as God created him. He was
reborn the instant that he chose to die instead of live. And will you
not forgive him now because he made an error in the past that God
remembers not and is not there? Now are you shifting back and forth
between the past and present. Sometimes the past seems real, as if it
were the present. Voices from the past are heard and then are doubted.
You are like to one who still hallucinates but lacks conviction in what
he perceives. This is the borderland between the worlds, the bridge
between the past and present. Here the shadow of the past remains, but
still a present light is dimly recognized. Once it is seen, this light
can never be forgotten. It must draw you from the past into the present,
where you really *are*.

^40^ The shadow voices do not change the laws of time or of eternity.
They come from what is past and gone and hinder not the true existence
of the here and now. The real world is the second part of the
hallucination time and death are real and have existence which can *be*
perceived. This terrible illusion was denied in but the time it took for
God to give His answer to illusion for all time and every circumstance.
And then it was no more, to be experienced as there.

^41^ Each day and every minute in each day and every instant that each
minute holds, you but relive the single instant when the time of terror
was replaced by love. And so you die each day to live again until you
cross the gap between past and present, which is not a gap at all. Such
is each life-a seeming interval from birth to death and on to life
again, a repetition of an instant gone by long ago, which cannot *be*
relived. And all of time is but the mad belief that what is over is
still here and now.

^42^ Forgive the past and let it go, for it *is* gone. You stand no
longer on the ground that lies between the worlds. You have gone on and
reached the world that lies at Heaven's gate. There is no hindrance to
the Will of God nor any need that you repeat again a journey that was
over long ago. Look gently on each other and behold the world in which
perception of your hate has been transformed into a world of love.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Appointed Friend**](#part0004.html#level-220) {#part0031_split_006.html#h1-220 .level1a}

^43^ Anything in this world that you believe is good and valuable and
worth striving for can hurt you and will do so. Not because it has the
power to hurt, but just because you have denied it is but an illusion
and made it real. And it *is* real to you. It is *not* nothing and
through its perceived reality has entered all the world of sick
illusions. All belief in sin, in power of attack, in hurt and harm, in
sacrifice and death has come to you. For no one can make *one* illusion
real and still escape the rest. For who can choose to keep the ones
which he prefers and find the safety that the truth alone can give? Who
can believe illusions are the same and still maintain that even one is
best?

^44^ Lead not your little lives in solitude with one illusion as your
only friend. This is no friendship worthy of God's Son, nor one with
which he could remain content. Yet God has given him a better Friend in
Whom all power in earth and Heaven rests. The one illusion that *you*
think is friend obscures *His* grace and majesty from you and keeps His
friendship and forgiveness from your welcoming embrace. Without Him you
*are* friendless. Seek not another friend to take His place. There *is*
no other friend. What God appointed has no substitute, for what illusion
can replace the truth?

^45^ Who dwells with shadows is alone indeed, and loneliness is not the
Will of God. Would you allow one shadow to usurp the throne that God
appointed for your Friend if you but realized its emptiness has left
*yours* empty and unoccupied? Make no illusion friend, for if you do, it
can but take the place of Him whom God has called your Friend. And it is
He who is your *only* Friend in truth. He brings you gifts that are not
of this world, and only He to whom they have been given can make sure
that you receive them. He will place them on your throne when you make
room for Him on His.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. Review of Principles**](#part0004.html#level-221) {#part0031_split_007.html#h1-221 .level1a}

^46^ This is a course in miracles. And as such, the laws of healing must
be understood before the purpose of the course can be accomplished. Let
us review the principles that we have covered and arrange them in a way
that summarizes all that must occur for healing to be possible. For when
it once is possible, it *must* occur. All sickness comes from
separation. When the separation is denied, it goes. For it is gone as
soon as the idea which brought it has been healed and been replaced by
sanity. Sickness and sin are seen as consequence and cause in a
relationship kept hidden from awareness that it may be carefully
preserved from reason's light.

^47^ Guilt *asks* for punishment, and its request is granted-not in
truth but in the world of shadows and illusions built on sin. The Son of
God perceives what he would see, because perception *is* a wish
fulfilled. Perception changes, made to take the place of changeless
knowledge. Yet is truth unchanged. It cannot be perceived, but only
known. What is perceived takes many forms, but none has meaning. Brought
to truth, its senselessness is quite apparent. Kept apart from truth, it
seems to have a meaning and be real.

^48^ Perception's laws are opposite to truth, and what is true of
knowledge is not true of anything that is apart from it. Yet has God
given answer to the world of sickness which applies to *all* its forms.
God's answer is eternal, though it operates in time where it is needed.
Yet because it *is* of God, the laws of time do not affect its workings.
It is in this world, but not a part of it. For it is real and dwells
where all reality must be. Ideas leave not their source, and their
effects but seem to be apart from them. Ideas are of the mind. What is
projected out and seems to be external to the mind is not outside at all
but an effect of what is in and has not left its source.

^49^ God's answer lies where the belief in sin must be, for only there
can its effects be utterly undone and without cause. Perception's laws
must be reversed, because they *are* reversals of the laws of truth. The
laws of truth forever will be true and cannot be reversed, yet can be
*seen* as upside-down. And this must be corrected where the illusion of
reversal lies.

^50^ It is impossible that one illusion be less amenable to truth than
are the rest. But it *is* possible that some are given greater value and
less willingly offered to truth for healing and for help. No illusion
has any truth in it. Yet it appears some are more true than others,
although this clearly makes no sense at all. All that a hierarchy of
illusions can show is preference, not reality. What relevance has
preference to the truth? Illusions are illusions and are false. Your
preference gives them no reality. Not one is true in any way, and all
must yield with equal ease to what God gave as answer to them all. God's
Will is One. And any wish that seems to go against His Will has no
foundation in the truth.

^51^ Sin is not error, for it goes beyond correction to impossibility.
Yet the belief that it is real has made some errors seem forever past
the hope of healing and the lasting grounds for hell. If this were so,
would Heaven be opposed by its own opposite, as real as it. Then would
God's Will be split in two and all creation be subjected to the laws of
two opposing powers until God becomes impatient, splits the world apart,
and relegates attack unto Himself. Thus has He lost His Mind,
proclaiming sin has taken His reality from Him, and brought His love at
last to vengeance's heels. For such an insane picture, an insane defense
can be expected but *cannot* establish that the picture must be true.

^52^ Nothing gives meaning where no meaning is. And truth *needs* no
defense to make it true. Illusions have no witnesses and no effects. Who
looks on them is but deceived. Forgiveness is the only function here and
serves to bring the joy this world denies to every aspect of God's Son
where sin was thought to rule. Perhaps you do not see the role
forgiveness plays in ending death and all beliefs that rise from mists
of guilt.

^53^ Sins are beliefs which you impose between your brother and
yourself. They limit you to time and place and give a little space to
you, another little space to him. This separating off is symbolized in
your perception by a body which is clearly separate and a thing apart.
Yet what this symbol represents is but your wish to *be* apart and
separate. Forgiveness takes *away* what stands between your brother and
yourself. It is the wish that you be joined with him and *not* apart. We
call it "wish" because it still conceives of other choices and has not
yet reached beyond the world of choice entirely.

^54^ Yet is this wish in line with Heaven's state and not in opposition
to God's Will. Although it falls far short of giving you your full
inheritance, it *does* remove the obstacles which you have placed
between the Heaven where you are and recognition of where and what you
are. Facts are unchanged. Yet facts can be denied and thus unknown,
though they were known *before* they were denied.

^55^ Salvation, perfect and complete, asks but a little wish that what
is true be true; a little willingness to overlook what is not there; a
little sigh that speaks for Heaven as a preference to this world which
death and desolation seem to rule. In joyous answer will creation rise
within you to replace the world you see with Heaven, wholly perfect and
complete. What is forgiveness but a willingness that truth be true? What
can remain unhealed and broken from a Unity Which holds all things
within Itself? There *is* no sin. And every miracle is possible the
instant that the Son of God perceives his wishes and the Will of God are
one.

^56^ What is the Will of God? He wills His Son have everything. And this
He guaranteed when He created him *as* everything. It is impossible that
anything be lost if what you *have* is what you *are*. This is the
miracle by which creation became your function, sharing it with God. It
is not understood apart from Him and therefore has no meaning in this
world.

^57^ Here does the Son of God ask not too much but far too little. He
would sacrifice his own identity with everything to find a little
treasure of his own. And this he cannot do without a sense of isolation,
loss, and loneliness. This is the treasure he has sought to find. And he
could only be afraid of it. Is fear a treasure? Can uncertainty be what
you *want*? Or is it a mistake about your will and what you *really*
are? Let us consider what the error is, so it can be corrected, not
protected.

^58^ Sin is belief attack can be projected outside the mind where the
belief arose. Here is the firm conviction that ideas *can* leave their
source made real and meaningful. And from this error does the world of
sin and sacrifice arise. This world is an attempt to prove your
innocence while cherishing attack. Its failure lies in that you *still*
feel guilty, though without understanding *why*. Effects are seen as
separate from their source and seem to be beyond you to control or to
prevent. What is thus *kept* apart can never join.

^59^ Cause and effect are one, not separate. God wills you learn what
always has been true-that He created you as part of Him, and this must
still be true *because* ideas leave not their source. Such is creation's
law-that each idea the mind conceives but *adds* to its abundance,
*never* takes away. This is as true of what is idly wished as what is
truly willed, because the mind can wish to be deceived but cannot make
it be what it is not. And to believe ideas can leave their source is to
invite illusions to be true, *without success*. For never will success
be possible in trying to deceive the Son of God.

^60^ The miracle is possible when cause and consequence are brought
together, not kept separate. The healing of effect without the cause can
merely shift effects to other forms. And this is *not* release. God's
Son could never be content with less than full salvation and escape from
guilt. For otherwise he still demands that he must make some sacrifice
and thus denies that everything is his, unlimited by loss of any kind. A
tiny sacrifice is just the same in its effects as is the whole idea of
sacrifice. If loss in any form is possible, then is God's Son made
incomplete and not himself. \[Nor will he know himself nor recognize his
will.\] He has forsworn his Father *and* himself and made them both his
enemies in hate.

^61^ Illusions serve the purpose they were made to serve. And from their
purpose, they derive whatever meaning that they seem to have. God gave
to all illusions that were made *another* purpose that would justify a
miracle, whatever form they took. In every miracle all healing lies, for
God gave answer to them all as one. And what is one to Him must be the
same. If you believe what is the same is different, you but deceive
yourself. What God calls one will be forever one, not separate. His
Kingdom *is* united-thus it was created, and thus will it ever be.

^62^ The miracle but calls your ancient name, which you will recognize
because the truth is in your memory. And to this name, your brother
calls for his release and yours. Heaven is shining on the Son of God.
Deny him not, that you may be released. Each instant is the Son of God
reborn, until he chooses not to die again. In every wish to hurt, he
chooses death instead of what his Father wills for him. Yet every
instant offers life to him because his Father wills that he should live.

^63^ In crucifixion is redemption laid, for healing is not needed where
there is no pain or suffering. Forgiveness is the answer to attack of
any kind. So is attack deprived of its effects, and hate is answered in
the name of love. To you to whom it has been given to save the Son of
God from crucifixion and from hell and death, all glory be forever. For
you have power to save the Son of God because his Father willed that it
be so. And in your hands does all salvation lie, to be both offered and
received as one.

^64^ To use the power God has given you as He would have it used is
natural. It is not arrogant to be as He created you or to make use of
what He gave to answer all His Son's mistakes and set him free. But it
*is* arrogant to lay aside the power that He gave and choose a little
senseless wish instead of what He wills. The gift of God to you is
limitless. There is no circumstance it cannot answer and no problem
which is not resolved within its gracious light.

^65^ Abide in peace, where God would have you be, and be the means
whereby your brother finds the peace in which your wishes are fulfilled.
Let us unite in bringing blessing to the world of sin and death. For
what can save each one of us can save us all. There is no difference
among the Sons of God. The unity that specialness denies will save them
all, for what is one can have no specialness. And everything belongs to
each of them. No wishes lie between a brother and his own. To get from
one is to deprive them all. And yet to bless but one gives blessing to
them all as one.

^66^ Your ancient name belongs to everyone, as theirs to you. Call on
your brother's name and God will answer, for on Him you call. Could He
refuse to answer when He has *already* answered all who call on Him? A
miracle can make no change at all. But it *can* make what always has
been true be recognized by those who know it not. And by this little
gift of truth but let to be itself-the Son of God allowed to be himself
and all creation freed to call upon the Name of God as one.
:::

[]{#part0031_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The Immediacy of Salvation**](#part0004.html#level-222) {#part0031_split_008.html#h1-222 .level1a}

^67^ The one remaining problem that you have is that you see an interval
between the time when you forgive and will receive the benefits of
trust. This but reflects the little you would keep between yourselves
that you might be a little separate. For time and space are one illusion
which takes different forms. If it has been projected beyond your minds,
you think of it as time. The nearer it is brought to where it is, the
more you think of it in terms of space.

^68^ There is a distance you would keep apart from one another, and this
space you see as time because you still believe you are external to each
other. This makes trust impossible. And you cannot believe that trust
would settle every problem *now*. Thus do you think it safer to remain a
little careful and a little watchful of interests perceived as separate.
From this perception you cannot conceive of gaining what forgiveness
offers *now*. The interval you think lies in between the giving and
receiving of the gift seems to be one in which you sacrifice and suffer
loss. You see eventual salvation, not immediate results.

^69^ Salvation *is* immediate. Unless you so perceive it, you will be
afraid of it, believing that the risk of loss is great between the time
its purpose is made yours and its effects will come to you. In this form
is the error still obscured that is the source of fear. Salvation
*would* wipe out the space you see between you still and let you
instantly become as one. And it is *here* you fear the loss would lie.
Do not project this fear to time, for time is not the enemy that you
perceive. Time is as neutral as the body is except in terms of what you
see it *for*. If you would keep a little space between you still, you
want a little time in which forgiveness is withheld a little while. This
makes the interval between the time in which forgiveness is withheld and
given seem dangerous, with terror justified.

^70^ Yet space between you is apparent *now* and cannot be perceived in
future time. No more can it be overlooked except within the present.
Future loss is not your fear. But present *joining* is your dread. Who
can feel desolation except *now*? A future cause as yet has no effects.
And therefore must it be that if you fear, there is a *present* cause.
And it is *this* that needs correction, not a future state.

^71^ The plans you make for safety all are laid within the future, where
you *cannot* plan. No purpose has been given it as yet, and what will
happen has as yet no cause. Who can predict effects without a cause? And
who could fear effects unless he thought they *had* been caused and
judged disastrous *now*? Belief in sin arouses fear and, like its cause,
is looking forward; looking back, but *overlooking* what is here and
now. Yet only here and now its cause must be if its effects already have
been judged as fearful. And in overlooking this, is it protected and
kept separate from healing. For a miracle is *now*. It stands already
here in present grace, within the only interval of time which sin and
fear have overlooked but which is all there *is* to time. The working
out of all correction takes no time at all.

^72^ Yet the *acceptance* of the working out can seem to take forever.
The change of purpose the Holy Spirit brought to your relationship has
in it all effects that you will see. They can be looked at *now*. Why
wait till they unfold in time and fear they may not come, although
already there? You have been told that everything brings good that comes
from God. And yet it seems as if this is not so. Good in disaster's form
is difficult to credit in advance. Nor is there really sense in this
idea.

^73^ Why should the good appear in evil's form? And is it not deception
if it does? Its cause is here if it appears at all. Why are not its
effects apparent then? Why in the future? And you seek to be content
with sighing and with "reasoning" you do not understand it now but will
some day. And then its meaning will be clear. This is not reason, for it
is unjust and clearly hints at punishment until the time of liberation
is at hand. Given a change of purpose for the good, there is no reason
for an interval in which disaster strikes, to be perceived as "good"
some day but now in form of pain. This is a sacrifice of *now*, which
could not be the cost the Holy Spirit asks for what He gave without a
cost at all.

^74^ Yet this illusion has a cause which, though untrue, must be already
in your mind. And this illusion is but one effect which it engenders and
one form in which its outcome is perceived. This interval in time, when
retribution is perceived to be the form in which the "good" appears, is
but one aspect of the little space that lies between you, unforgiven
still.

^75^ Be not content with future happiness. It has no meaning and is
*not* your just reward. For you have cause for freedom *now*. What
profits freedom in a prisoner's form? Why should deliverance be
disguised as death? Delay is senseless, and the "reasoning" which would
maintain effects of present cause must be delayed until a future time is
merely a denial of the fact that consequence and cause must come as one.
Look not to time but to the little space between you still to be
delivered from. And do not let it be disguised as time and so preserved
because its form is changed and what it *is* cannot be recognized. The
Holy Spirit's purpose *now* is yours. Should not His happiness be yours
as well?
:::

[]{#part0031_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. For They Have Come**](#part0004.html#level-223) {#part0031_split_009.html#h1-223 .level1a}

^76^ Think but how holy you must be from whom the Voice for God calls
lovingly unto your brother, that you may awake in him the Voice that
answers to your call! And think how holy he must be when in him sleeps
your own salvation with his freedom joined! However much you wish he be
condemned, God is in him. And never will you know He is in you as well,
while you attack His chosen home and battle with His host. Regard him
gently. Look with loving eyes on him who carries Christ within him, that
you may behold His glory and rejoice that Heaven is not separate from
you.

^77^ Is it too much to ask a little trust for him who carries Christ to
you, that you may be forgiven all your sins and left without a single
one you cherish still? Forget not that a shadow held between your
brother and yourself obscures the face of Christ and memory of God. And
would you trade Them for an ancient hate? The ground whereon you stand
is holy ground because of Them Who, standing there with you, have
blessed it with Their innocence and peace.

^78^ The blood of hatred fades to let the grass grow green again and let
the flowers be all white and sparkling in the summer sun. What was a
place of death has now become a living temple in a world of light.
Because of Them. It is Their Presence which has lifted holiness again to
take its ancient place upon an ancient throne. Because of Them have
miracles sprung up as grass and flowers on the barren ground which hate
had scorched and rendered desolate. What hate has wrought have They
undone. And now you stand on ground so holy Heaven leans to join with it
and make it like itself. The shadow of an ancient hate has gone, and all
the blight and withering have passed forever from the land where They
have come.

^79^ What is a hundred or a thousand years to Them, or tens of
thousands? When They come, time's purpose is fulfilled. What never was
passes to nothingness when They have come. What hatred claimed is given
up to love, and freedom lights up every living thing and lifts it into
Heaven, where the lights grow ever brighter as each one comes home. The
incomplete is made complete again, and Heaven's joy has been increased
because what is its own has been restored to it. The bloodied earth is
cleansed, and the insane have shed their garments of insanity to join
Them on the ground whereon you stand.

^80^ Heaven is grateful for this gift of what has been withheld so long.
For They have come to gather in Their Own. What has been locked is
opened; what was held apart from light is given up, that light may shine
on it, and leave no space nor distance lingering between the light of
Heaven and the world.

^81^ The holiest of all the spots on earth is where an ancient hatred
has become a present love. And They come quickly to the living temple,
where a home for Them has been set up. There is no place in Heaven
holier. And They have come to dwell within the temple offered them, to
be Their resting-place as well as yours. What hatred has released to
love becomes the brightest light in Heaven's radiance. And all the
lights in Heaven brighter grow, in gratitude for what has been restored.

^82^ Around you angels hover lovingly, to keep away all darkened
thoughts of sin and keep the light where it has entered in. Your
footprints lighten up the world, for where you walk forgiveness gladly
goes with you. No one on earth but offers thanks to one who has restored
his home and sheltered him from bitter winter and the freezing cold. And
shall the Lord of Heaven and His Son give less in gratitude for so much
more?

^83^ Now is the temple of the Living God rebuilt as host again to Him by
Whom it was created. Where He dwells, His Son dwells with Him, never
separate. And They give thanks that They are welcome made at last. Where
stood a cross stands now the risen Christ, and ancient scars are healed
within His sight. An ancient miracle has come to bless and to replace an
ancient enmity that came to kill. In gentle gratitude do God the Father
and the Son return to what is Theirs and will forever be. Now is the
Holy Spirit's purpose done. For They have come! For They have come at
last!
:::

[]{#part0031_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**XI. The Remaining Task**](#part0004.html#level-224) {#part0031_split_010.html#h1-224 .level1a}

^84^ What then remains to be undone for you to realize Their Presence?
Only this-you have a differential view of when attack is justified and
when you think it is unfair and not to be allowed. When you perceive it
as unfair, you think that a response of anger now is just. And thus you
see what is the same as different. Confusion is not limited. If it
occurs at all, it will be total. And its presence, in whatever form,
will hide Their Presence. They are known with clarity or not at all.
Confused perception will block knowledge. It is not a question of the
size of the confusion or how much it interferes. Its simple presence
shuts the door to Theirs and keeps Them there unknown.

^85^ What does it mean if you perceive attack in certain forms to be
unfair to you? It means that there must be some forms in which you think
it *fair*. For otherwise, how could some be evaluated as unfair? Some
then are given meaning and perceived as sensible. And only some are seen
as meaningless. And this denies the fact that *all* are
senseless-equally without a cause or consequence and cannot have effects
of *any* kind. Their Presence is obscured by any veil which stands
between Their shining innocence and your awareness it is your own and
*equally* belongs to every living thing along with you. God limits not.
And what is limited can *not* be Heaven. So it *must* be hell.

^86^ Unfairness and attack are *one* mistake, so firmly joined that
where one is perceived, the other must be seen. You cannot *be* unfairly
treated. The belief you are is but another form of the idea you are
deprived by someone not yourself. Projection of the cause of sacrifice
is at the root of everything perceived to be unfair and not your just
deserts. Yet it is *you* who ask this of yourself in deep injustice to
the Son of God. You have no enemy except yourself, and you are enemy
indeed to him because you do not know him *as* yourself. What could be
more unjust than that he be deprived of what he *is*, denied the right
to be himself, and asked to sacrifice his Father's love and yours as not
his due?

^87^ Beware of the temptation to perceive yourself unfairly treated. In
this view, you seek to find an innocence which is not Theirs but yours
alone and at the cost of someone else's guilt. Can innocence be
purchased by the giving of your guilt to someone else? And *is* this
innocence which your attack on him attempts to get? Is it not
retribution for your own attack upon the Son of God you seek? Is it not
safer to believe that you are innocent of this and victimized despite
your innocence? Whatever way the game of guilt is played, there *must*
be loss. Someone must lose his innocence that someone else can take it
from him, making it his own.

^88^ You think your brother is unfair to you because you think that one
must be unfair to make the other innocent. And in this game do you
perceive one purpose for your whole relationship. And this you seek to
add unto the purpose given it. The Holy Spirit's purpose is to let the
Presence of your holy Guests be known to you. And to this purpose,
nothing *can* be added, for the world is purposeless except for this. To
add or take away from this *one* goal is but to take away all purpose
from the world and from yourself. And each unfairness that the world
appears to lay upon you, *you* have laid on *it* by rendering it
purposeless, without the function that the Holy Spirit sees. And simple
justice has been thus denied to every living thing upon the earth.

^89^ What this injustice does to you who judge unfairly and who see as
you have judged, you cannot calculate. The world grows dim and
threatening, and not a trace of all the happy sparkle that salvation
brought can you perceive to lighten up your way. And so you see yourself
deprived of light, abandoned to the dark, unfairly left without a
purpose in a futile world. The world is fair because the Holy Spirit has
brought injustice to the light within, and there has all unfairness been
resolved and been replaced with justice and with love. If you perceive
injustice anywhere, you need but say:

^90^ By this do I deny the Presence of the Father and the Son.\
And I would rather know of Them than see injustice,\
which Their Presence shines away.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 27**](#part0004.html#chap-27) {#part0032_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Body and the Dream**](#part0004.html#chap-27) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-225) {#part0032_split_000.html#h1-225 .level1a1}

^27:1^ The wish to be unfairly treated is a compromise attempt that
would combine attack and innocence. Who can *combine* the wholly
incompatible and make a unity of what can never join? Walk you the
gentle way, and you will fear no evil and no shadows in the night. But
place no terror symbols on your path, or you will weave a crown of
thorns from which your brother and yourself will not escape. You cannot
crucify yourself alone. And if you are unfairly treated, he must suffer
the unfairness that you see. You cannot sacrifice yourself alone. For
sacrifice is total. If it could occur at all, it would entail the whole
of God's creation and the Father with the sacrifice of his beloved Son.

^2^ In your *release* from sacrifice is his made manifest, and shown to
be his own. But every pain you suffer do you see as proof that he is
guilty of attack. Thus would you make yourself to be the sign that he
has lost his innocence and need but look on you to realize that he has
been condemned. And what to you has been unfair will come to him in
righteousness. The unjust vengeance that you suffer now belongs to him,
and when it rests on him are you set free. Wish not to make yourself a
living symbol of his guilt, for you will not escape the death you made
for him. But in his *innocence,* you find your own.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Picture of the Crucifixion**](#part0004.html#level-226) {#part0032_split_001.html#h1-226 .level1a}

^3^ Whenever you consent to suffer pain, to be deprived, unfairly
treated, or in need of anything, you but accuse your brother of attack
upon God's Son. You hold a picture of your crucifixion before his eyes
that he may see his sins are writ in Heaven in your blood and death and
go before him, closing off the gate and damning him to hell. Yet this is
writ in hell and not in Heaven, where you are beyond attack and prove
his *innocence*. The picture of yourself you offer him you show
*yourself* and give it all your faith. The Holy Spirit offers you to
give to him a picture of yourself in which there is no pain and no
reproach at all. And what was martyred to his guilt becomes the perfect
witness to his innocence.

^4^ The power of witness is beyond belief because it brings conviction
in its wake. The witness is believed because he points beyond himself to
what he represents. A sick and suffering you but represents your
brother's guilt-the witness which you send lest he forget the injuries
he gave from which you swear he never will escape. This sick and sorry
picture *you* accept, if only it can serve to punish him. The sick are
merciless to everyone, and in contagion do they seek to kill. Death
seems an easy price if they can say, "Behold me, brother; at your hand I
die." For sickness is the witness to his guilt, and death would prove
his errors must be sins.

^5^ Sickness is but a "little" death; a form of vengeance not yet total.
Yet it speaks with certainty for what it represents. The bleak and
bitter picture you have sent your brother *you* have looked upon in
grief. And everything that it has shown to him have you believed because
it witnessed to the guilt in him which you perceived and loved. Now in
the hands made gentle by His touch, the Holy Spirit lays a picture of a
different you. It is a picture of a body still, for what you *really*
are cannot be seen nor pictured. Yet this one has not been used for
purpose of attack and therefore never suffered pain at all. It witnesses
to the eternal truth that you cannot *be* hurt and points beyond itself
to both your innocence and his.

^6^ Show *this* unto your brother, who will see that every scar is
healed and every tear is wiped away in laughter and in love. And he will
look on his forgiveness there and with healed eyes will look beyond it
to the innocence that he beholds in you. Here is the proof that he has
never sinned-that nothing which his madness bid him do was ever done or
ever had effects of any kind; that no reproach he laid upon his heart
was ever justified, and no attack can ever touch him with the poisoned
and relentless sting of fear. Attest his innocence and *not* his guilt.
*Your* healing is his comfort and his health because it *proves*
illusions are not true.

^7^ It is not will for life, but wish for death that is the motivation
for this world. Its only purpose is to prove guilt real. No worldly
thought or act or feeling has a motivation other than this one. These
are the witnesses that are called forth to be believed and lend
conviction to the system they speak for and represent. And each has many
voices, speaking to your brother and yourself in different tongues. And
yet to both the message is the same. Adornment of the body seeks to show
how lovely are the witnesses for guilt. Concerns about the body
demonstrate how frail and vulnerable is your life; how easily destroyed
is what you love. Depression speaks of death and vanity of real concern
with anything at all. The strongest witness to futility, which bolsters
all the rest and helps them paint the picture in which sin is justified,
is sickness in whatever form it takes.

^8^ The sick have reason for each one of their unnatural desires and
strange needs. For who could live a life so soon cut short and not
esteem the worth of passing joys? What pleasures could there be that
will endure? Are not the frail entitled to believe that every stolen
scrap of pleasure is their righteous payment for their little lives?
Their death will pay the price for all of them if they enjoy their
benefits or not. The end of life must come, whatever way that life be
spent. And so take pleasure in the quickly passing and ephemeral.

^9^ These are not sins, but witnesses unto the strange belief that sin
and death are real, and innocence and sin will end alike within the
termination of the grave. If this were true, there *would* be reason to
remain content to seek for passing joys and cherish little pleasures
where you can. Yet in this picture is the body not perceived as neutral
and without a goal inherent in itself. For it becomes the symbol of
reproach, the sign of guilt whose consequences still are there to see,
so that the cause can never be denied.

^10^ Your function is to show your brother sin can *have* no cause. How
futile must it be to see yourself a picture of the proof that what your
function is can never be! The Holy Spirit's picture changes not the body
into something it is not. It only takes away from it all signs of
accusation and of blamefulness. Pictured without a purpose, it is seen
as neither sick nor well, nor bad nor good. No grounds are offered that
it may be judged in any way at all. It has no life, but neither is it
dead. It stands apart from all experience of fear or love. For now it
witnesses to nothing yet, its purpose being open and the mind made free
again to choose what it is *for*. Now is it not condemned, but waiting
for a purpose to be given that it may fulfill the function that it will
receive.

^11^ Into this empty space, from which the goal of sin has been removed,
is Heaven free to be remembered. Here its peace can come and perfect
healing take the place of death. The body can become a sign of life, a
promise of redemption, and a breath of immortality to those grown sick
of breathing in the fetid scent of death. Let it have healing as its
purpose. Then will it send forth the message it received and by its
health and loveliness proclaim the truth and value that it represents.
Let it receive the power to represent an endless life, forever
unattacked. And to your brother let its message be, "Behold me, brother;
at your hand I live."

^12^ The simple way to let this be achieved is merely this-to let the
body have no purpose from the past, when you were sure you knew its
purpose was to foster guilt. For this insists your crippled picture is a
lasting sign of what it represents. This leaves no space in which a
different view, another purpose, can be given it. You do *not* know its
purpose. You but gave *illusions* of a purpose to a thing you made to
hide your function from yourself. This thing without a purpose cannot
hide the function that the Holy Spirit gave. Let, then, its purpose and
your function both be reconciled at last and seen as one.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Fear of Healing**](#part0004.html#level-227) {#part0032_split_002.html#h1-227 .level1a}

^13^ Is healing frightening? To many, yes. For accusation is a bar to
love, and damaged bodies are accusers. They stand firmly in the way of
trust and peace, proclaiming that the frail can have no trust and that
the damaged have no grounds for peace. Who has been injured by his
brother and could love and trust him still? He has attacked and will
attack again. Protect him not, because your damaged body shows that you
must be protected from him. To forgive may be an act of charity, but not
his due. He may be pitied for his guilt, but not exonerated. And if you
forgive him his transgressions, you but add to all the guilt that he has
really earned.

^14^ The unhealed *cannot* pardon. For they are the witnesses that
pardon is unfair. They would retain the consequences of the guilt they
overlook. Yet no one can forgive a sin which he believes is real. And
what has consequences *must* be real because what it has done is there
to see. Forgiveness is not pity which but seeks to pardon what it knows
to be the truth. Good cannot *be* returned for evil, for forgiveness
does not first establish sin and *then* forgive it. Who can say and
mean, "My brother, you have injured me, and yet because I am the better
of the two, I pardon you my hurt." His pardon and your hurt cannot exist
together. One denies the other and *must* make it false.

^15^ To witness sin and yet forgive it is a paradox which reason cannot
see. For it maintains what has been done to you deserves no pardon. And
by giving it, you grant your brother mercy but retain the proof he is
not really innocent. The sick remain accusers. They cannot forgive their
brothers and themselves as well. For no one in whom true forgiveness
reigns can suffer. He holds not the proof of sin before his brother's
eyes. And thus he must have overlooked it and removed it from his own.
Forgiveness cannot be for one and not the other. Who forgives *is*
healed. And in his healing lies the proof that he has truly pardoned and
retains no trace of condemnation that he still would hold against
himself or any living thing.

^16^ Forgiveness is not real *unless* it brings a healing to your
brother *and* yourself. You must attest his sins had no effect on you to
demonstrate they were not real. How else could he be guiltless? And how
could his innocence be justified unless his sins have no effect to
warrant guilt? Sins are beyond forgiveness just because they would
entail effects which cannot be undone and overlooked entirely. In their
undoing lies the proof that they were merely errors. *Let* yourself be
healed that you may be forgiving, offering salvation to your brother and
yourself. A broken body shows the mind has not been healed. A miracle of
healing proves that separation is without effect. What you would prove
to him, you will believe. The power of witness *comes* from your belief.
And everything you say or do or think but testifies to what you teach to
him.

^17^ Your body can be means to teach that it has never suffered pain
because of him. And in its healing can it offer him mute testimony of
his innocence. It is this testimony which can speak with power greater
than a thousand tongues. For here is his forgiveness *proved* to him. A
miracle can offer nothing less to him than it has given unto you. So
does your healing show your mind is healed and has forgiven what he did
not do. And so is he convinced his innocence was never lost and healed
along with you.

^18^ Thus does the miracle undo all things the world attests can never
*be* undone. And hopelessness and death must disappear before the
ancient clarion call of life. This call has power far beyond the weak
and miserable cry of death and guilt. The ancient calling of the Father
to His Son, and of the Son unto his own, will yet be the last trumpet
that the world will ever hear. Brother, there *is* no death. And this
you learn when you but wish to show your brother that you had no hurt of
him. He thinks your blood is on his hands, and so he stands condemned.
Yet it is given you to show him by your healing that his guilt is but
the fabric of a senseless dream.

^19^ How just are miracles! For they bestow an equal gift of full
deliverance from guilt upon your brother and yourself. Your healing
saves him pain as well as you, and you are healed because you wished him
well. This is the law the miracle obeys; that healing sees no
specialness at all. It does not come from pity but from love. And love
would prove all suffering is but a vain imagining, a foolish wish with
no effects. Your health is a result of your desire to see your brother
with no blood upon his hands nor guilt upon his heart made heavy with
the proof of sin. And what you wish *is* given you to see.

^20^ The "cost" of your serenity is his. This is the "price" the Holy
Spirit and the world interpret differently. The world perceives it as a
statement of the "fact" that your salvation *sacrifices* his. The Holy
Spirit *knows* your healing is the witness unto his and cannot be apart
from his at all. As long as he consents to suffer, you will be unhealed.
Yet you can show him that his suffering is purposeless and wholly
without cause. Show him your healing, and he will consent no more to
suffer. For his innocence has been established in your sight and his.
And laughter will replace your sighs because God's Son remembered that
he *is* God's Son.

^21^ Who then fears healing? Only those to whom their brother's
sacrifice and pain are seen to represent their own serenity. Their
helplessness and weakness represents the grounds on which they *justify*
his pain. The constant sting of guilt he suffers serves to prove that he
is slave but they are free. The constant pain they suffer demonstrates
that they are free *because* they hold him bound. And sickness is
desired to prevent a shift of balance in the sacrifice. How could the
Holy Spirit be deterred an instant, even less, to reason with an
argument for sickness such as this? And need your healing be delayed
because you pause to listen to insanity?

^21a^ \[Correction is *not* your function. It belongs to One Who knows
of fairness, *not* of guilt. If you assume correction's role, you *lose*
the function of forgiveness. No one can forgive until he learns
correction is *but* to forgive and *never* to accuse. Alone, you
*cannot* see they are the same, and therefore is correction *not* of
you. Identity and function are the same, and *by* your function do you
know yourself. And thus, if you confuse your function with the function
of Another, you *must* be confused about yourself and who you are. What
is the separation but a wish to take God's function from Him and *deny*
that it is His? Yet if it is *not* His, it is not *yours*, for *you*
must lose what you would take away.

^21b^ \[In a split mind, identity *must* seem to be divided. Nor can
anyone perceive a function unified which has conflicting purposes and
different ends. Correction, to a mind so split, *must* be a way to
punish sins you think are *yours* in someone else. And thus does he
become your victim, *not* your brother, *different* from you in that he
is *more guilty,* thus in need of your correction as the one *more
innocent* than he. This splits *his* function off from yours and gives
you both a *different* role. And so you *cannot* be perceived as one
and, with a single function, that would *mean* a shared identity with
but *one* end.

^21c^ \[Correction *you* would do *must* separate, because that is the
function given it *by* you. When you perceive correction is the *same*
as pardon, then you also know the Holy Spirit's Mind and yours are one.
And so your *own* Identity is found. Yet must He work with what is
*given* Him, and you allow Him only *half* your mind. And thus He
represents the *other* half and seems to have a *different* purpose from
the one you cherish and you *think* is yours. Thus does your function
seem *divided*, with a half *in opposition* to a half. And these two
halves appear to represent a split within a self perceived as two.\]

^22^ Consider how this self perception must extend, and do not overlook
the fact that every thought extends because that *is* its purpose, being
what it really is. From an idea of self as two, there comes a necessary
view of function split between the two. And what you would correct is
only half the error, which you think is all of it. Your brother's sins
become the central target for correction, lest your errors and his own
be seen as one. Yours are mistakes, but his are sins and not the same as
yours. His merit punishment, while yours in fairness should be
overlooked.

^23^ In this interpretation of correction, your own mistakes you will
not even see. The focus of correction has been placed outside yourself
on one who cannot be a part of you while this perception lasts. What is
condemned can never be returned to its accuser, who hated it and hates
it still. This is your brother, focus of your hate, unworthy to be part
of you and thus outside yourself-the other half which is denied. And
only what is left without his presence is perceived as all of you. To
this remaining half the Holy Spirit must represent the other half until
you recognize it *is* the other half. And this He does by giving both of
you a function that is one, not different.

^24^ Correction is the function given *both*, but neither one alone. And
when it is fulfilled as *shared*, it *must* correct mistakes in both of
you. It cannot leave mistakes in one unhealed and set the other free.
That is divided purpose which cannot be shared, and so it cannot be the
function which the Holy Spirit sees as His. And you can rest assured
that He will not fulfill a function He cannot understand and recognize
as His. For only thus can He keep yours preserved intact, despite your
separate views of what your function is. If He upheld divided function,
you were lost indeed. His inability to see His goal divided and distinct
for each of you preserves your Self from being made aware of any
function other than Its own. And thus is healing given both of you.

^25^ Correction must be left to One Who knows correction and forgiveness
are the same. With half a mind, this is not understood. Leave then
correction to the Mind that *is* united, functioning as one because It
is not split in purpose, and conceives a single function as Its *only*
one. Here is the function given It conceived to be Its own and not apart
from that Its Giver keeps *because* it has been shared. In His
acceptance of this function lies the means whereby your mind is unified.
His single purpose unifies the halves of you which you perceive as
separate. And each forgives the other, that he may accept his other half
as part of him.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Symbol of the Impossible**](#part0004.html#level-228) {#part0032_split_003.html#h1-228 .level1a}

^26^ Power cannot oppose. For opposition would weaken it, and weakened
power is a contradiction in ideas. Weak strength is meaningless, and
power used to weaken is employed to limit. And therefore it must be
limited and weak because that is its purpose. Power is unopposed, to be
itself. No weakness can intrude on it without changing it into something
it is not. To weaken is to limit and impose an opposite that contradicts
the concept which it attacks. And by this does it join to the idea a
something it is not and make it unintelligible. Who can understand a
double concept, such as "weakened-power" or as "hateful-love?"

^27^ You have decided that your brother is a symbol for a
"hateful-love," a "weakened-power," and above all, a "living-death." And
so he has no meaning to you, for he stands for what is meaningless. He
represents a double thought, where half is cancelled out by the
remaining half. Yet even this is quickly contradicted by the half it
cancelled out, and so they both are gone. And now he stands for nothing.
Symbols which but represent ideas that cannot be must stand for empty
space and nothingness. Yet nothingness and empty space can *not* be
interference. What *can* interfere with the awareness of reality is the
belief that there is something *there*.

^28^ The picture of your brother that you see means nothing. There is
nothing to attack or to deny, love, or hate, or to endow with power or
to see as weak. The picture has been wholly cancelled out because it
symbolized a contradiction which cancelled out the *thought* it
represents. And thus the picture has no cause at all. Who can perceive
effect without a cause? What can the causeless be but nothingness? The
picture of your brother that you see is wholly absent and has never
been. Let then the empty space it occupies be *recognized* as vacant,
and the time devoted to its seeing be perceived as idly spent, a time
unoccupied.

^29^ An empty space which is not seen as filled, an unused interval of
time not seen as spent and fully occupied, becomes a silent invitation
to the truth to enter and to make itself at home. No preparation can be
made that would enhance the invitation's real appeal. For what you leave
as vacant, God will fill, and where He is, there *must* the truth abide.
Unweakened power with no opposite is what creation *is.* For this there
*are* no symbols. Nothing points beyond the truth, for what can stand
for more than everything? Yet true undoing must be kind. And so the
first replacement for your picture is another picture of another kind.

^30^ As nothingness cannot be pictured, so there is no symbol for
totality. Reality is ultimately known without a form, unpictured and
unseen. Forgiveness is not yet a power known as wholly free of limits.
Yet it sets no limits you have chosen to impose. Forgiveness is the
means by which the truth is represented temporarily. It lets the Holy
Spirit make exchange of pictures possible until the time when aids are
meaningless and learning done. No learning aid has use which can extend
beyond the goal of learning. When its aim has been accomplished, it is
functionless. Yet in the learning interval it has a use which now you
fear, but yet will love.

^31^ The picture of your brother given you to occupy the space so lately
left unoccupied and vacant will not need defense of any kind. For you
will give it overwhelming preference. Nor delay an instant in deciding
that it is the only one you want. It does not stand for double concepts.
Though it is but half the picture and is incomplete, within itself it is
the same. The other half of what it represents remains unknown but is
not cancelled out. And thus is God left free to take the final step
Himself. \[For this you need *no* pictures and *no* learning aids.\] And
what will ultimately take the place of every learning aid will merely
*be*. Forgiveness vanishes and symbols fade, and nothing which the eyes
have ever seen, or ears have heard, remains to be perceived.

^32^ A Power wholly limitless has come, not to destroy, but to receive
Its own. There is no choice of function anywhere. The choice you fear to
lose you never had. Yet only this appears to interfere with power
unlimited and single thoughts, complete and happy, without opposite. You
do not know the peace of power which opposes nothing. Yet no other kind
can be at all. Give welcome to the Power beyond forgiveness and beyond
the world of symbols and of limitations. He would merely *be*, and so He
merely *is.*
:::

[]{#part0032_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Quiet Answer**](#part0004.html#level-229) {#part0032_split_004.html#h1-229 .level1a}

^33^ In quietness are all things answered and is every problem quietly
resolved. In conflict there can *be* no answer and no resolution, for
its purpose is to make no resolution possible and to ensure no answer
will be plain. A problem set in conflict *has* no answer, for it is seen
in different ways. And what would be an answer from one point of view is
not an answer in another light. You *are* in conflict. Thus it must be
clear you cannot answer anything at all, for conflict has no limited
effects. Yet if God gave an answer, there must be a way in which your
problems are resolved, for what He wills already has been done.

^34^ Thus it must be that time is not involved, and every problem can be
answered *now.* Yet it must also be that in your state of mind solution
is impossible. Therefore, God must have given you a way of reaching to
another state of mind in which the answer is already there. Such is the
holy instant. It is here that all your problems should be brought and
*left*. Here they belong, for here their answer is. \[And where its
answer is, a problem must be simple and be easily resolved.\] It must be
pointless to attempt to solve a problem where the answer cannot be. Yet
just as surely it must be resolved if it is brought to where the answer
*is*.

^35^ Attempt to solve no problems but within the holy instant's surety.
For there the problem *will* be answered and resolved. Outside there
will be no solution, for there is no answer there that could be found.
Nowhere outside a single simple question is ever asked. The world can
only ask a double question with many answers, none of which will do. It
does not ask a question to be answered, but only to restate its point of
view. All questions asked within this world are but a way of *looking*,
not a question asked. A question asked in hate cannot be answered,
because it is an answer in itself. A double question asks and answers,
both attesting the same thing in different form.

^36^ The world asks but *one* question. It is this: "Of these illusions,
which of them are true? Which ones establish peace and offer joy? And
which can bring escape from all the pain of which this world is made?"
Whatever form the question takes, its purpose is the same. It asks but
to establish sin is real and answers in the form of preference. "Which
sin do you prefer? That is the one which you should choose. The others
are not true. What can the body get that you would want the most of all?
It is your servant and your friend. But tell it what you want, and it
will serve you lovingly and well." And this is not a question, for it
tells you what you want and where to go for it. It leaves no room to
question its beliefs, except that what it states takes question's
*form*.

^37^ A pseudo-question has no answer. It *dictates* the answer even as
it asks. Thus is all questioning within the world a form of propaganda
for itself. Just as the body's witnesses are but the senses from within
itself, so are the answers to the questions of the world contained
within the questions. Where answers represent the questions, they add
nothing new, and nothing has been learned.

^38^ An honest question is a learning tool which asks for something that
you do *not* know. It does not set conditions for response, but merely
asks what the response should be. But no one in a conflict state is free
to ask this question, for he does not want an honest answer where the
conflict ends. Only within the holy instant can an honest question
honestly be asked. And from the meaning of the question does the
meaningfulness of the answer come. Here is it possible to separate your
wishes from the answer, so it can be given you and also be *received*.
The answer is provided everywhere. Yet it is only here it can be
*heard*.

^39^ An honest answer asks no sacrifice because it answers questions
truly asked. The questions of the world but ask of whom is sacrifice
demanded, asking not if sacrifice is meaningful at all. And so *unless*
the answer tells "of whom," it will remain unrecognized, unheard, and
thus the question is preserved intact because it gave the answer to
itself. The holy instant is the interval in which the mind is still
enough to hear an answer which is not entailed within the question
asked. It offers something new and different from the question. How
could it be answered if it but repeats itself?

^40^ Therefore, attempt to solve no problems in a world from which the
answer has been barred. But bring the problem to the only place which
holds the answer lovingly for you. Here are the answers which will solve
your problems because they stand apart from them, and see what *can* be
answered-what the question *is.* Within the world the answers merely
raise another question, though they leave the first unanswered. In the
holy instant, you can bring the question to the answer and receive the
answer that was made *for* you.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Healing Example**](#part0004.html#level-230) {#part0032_split_005.html#h1-230 .level1a}

^41^ The only way to heal is to be healed. The miracle extends without
your help, but you *are* needed that it can begin. Accept the miracle of
healing, and it will go forth because of what it *is*. It is its nature
to extend itself the instant it is born. And it is born the instant it
is offered and *received*. No one can ask another to be healed. But he
can let *himself* be healed and thus offer the other what he has
received. Who can bestow upon another what he does not have? And who can
share what he denies himself? The Holy Spirit speaks to *you*. He does
not speak to someone else. Yet by your listening, His Voice extends
because you have *accepted* what He says.

^42^ Health is the witness unto health. As long as it is unattested, it
remains without conviction. Only when demonstrated has it been proved
and *must* compel belief. No one is healed through double messages. If
you wish only to be healed, you heal. Your *single* purpose makes this
possible. But if you are afraid of healing, then it cannot come through
you. The only thing that is required for a healing is a lack of fear.
The fearful are not healed and cannot heal. This does not mean the
conflict must be gone forever from your mind. For if it were, there'd be
no need for healing then. But it *does* mean, if only for an instant,
you love without attack. An instant is sufficient. Miracles wait not on
time.

^43^ The holy instant is the miracle's abiding-place. From there each
one is born into this world as witness to a state of mind which has
transcended conflict and has reached to peace. It carries comfort from
the place of peace into the battleground and demonstrates that war has
no effects. For all the hurt that war has sought to bring-the broken
bodies and the shattered limbs, the screaming dying and the silent
dead-are gently lifted up and comforted. There *is* no sadness where a
miracle has come to heal. And nothing more than just *one* instant of
your love without attack is necessary that all this occur. In that one
instant are you healed, and in that single instant is all healing done.

^44^ What stands apart from you when you accept the blessing that the
holy instant brings? Be not afraid of blessing, for the One Who blesses
you loves all the world and leaves nothing within the world that could
be feared. But if you shrink from blessing will the world indeed seem
fearful, for you have withheld its peace and comfort, leaving it to die.
Would not a world so bitterly bereft be looked on as a condemnation by
the one who could have saved it but stepped back because he was afraid
of being healed? The eyes of all the dying bring reproach, and suffering
whispers, "What is there to fear?" Consider well its question. It is
asked of you on your behalf. A dying world asks only that you rest an
instant from attack upon yourself, that it be healed.

^45^ Come to the holy instant and be healed, for nothing that is there
received is left behind on your returning to the world. And being
blessed, you will bring blessing. Life is given you to give the dying
world. And suffering eyes no longer will accuse, but shine in thanks to
you who blessing gave. The holy instant's radiance will light your eyes
and give them sight to see beyond all suffering and see Christ's face
instead. Healing *replaces* suffering. Who looks on one cannot perceive
the other, for they cannot both be there. And what you see the world
will witness, and will witness *to*.

^46^ Thus is your healing everything the world requires that it may be
healed. It needs *one* lesson which has perfectly been learned. And then
when you forget it will the world remind you gently of what you have
taught. No reinforcement will its thanks withhold from you who let
yourself be healed that it might live. It will call forth its witnesses
to show the face of Christ to you who brought the sight to them by which
they witnessed it. The world of accusation is replaced by one in which
all eyes look lovingly upon the Friend who brought them their release.
And happily your brother will perceive the many friends he thought were
enemies.

^47^ Problems are not specific, but they take specific forms, and these
specific shapes make up the world. And no one understands the nature of
his problem. If he did, it would be there no more for him to see. Its
very nature is that it is *not*. And thus while he perceives it, he *can
not* perceive it as it is. But healing is apparent in specific instances
and generalizes to include them all. This is because they really are the
same despite their different forms. All learning aims at transfer, which
becomes complete within two situations which are seen as one, for *only*
common elements are there. Yet this can only be attained by One Who does
not see the differences you see. The total transfer of your learning is
not made by you. But that it has been made in spite of all the
differences you see convinces you that they could not be real.

^48^ Your healing will extend and will be brought to problems that you
thought were not your own. And it will also be apparent that your many
different problems will be solved as any one of them has been escaped.
It cannot be their differences which made this possible, for learning
does not jump from situations to their opposites and bring the same
results. All healing must proceed in lawful manner in accord with laws
which have been properly perceived but never violated. Fear you not the
way that you perceive them. You are wrong, but there is One within you
Who is *right*.

^49^ Leave, then, the transfer of your learning to the One Who really
understands its laws and Who will guarantee that they remain unviolated
and unlimited. Your part is merely to apply what He has taught you to
*yourself*, and He will do the rest. And thus the power of your learning
will be proved to you by all the many different witnesses it finds. Your
brother first among them will be seen, but thousands stand behind him,
and beyond each one there are a thousand more. Each one may seem to have
a problem which is different from the rest. Yet they are solved
together. And their common answer shows the questions could not have
been separate.

^50^ Peace be to you whom is healing offered. And you will learn that
peace is given you when you accept the healing for yourself. Its total
value need not be appraised by you to let you understand that you have
benefitted from it. What occurred within the instant which love entered
in without attack will stay with you forever. Your healing will be one
of its effects, as will your brother's. Everywhere you go will you
behold its multiplied effects. Yet all the witnesses that you behold
will be far less than all there really are. Infinity cannot be
understood by merely counting up its separate parts. God thanks you for
your healing, for He knows it is a gift of love unto His Son, and
therefore is it given unto Him.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Purpose of Pain**](#part0004.html#level-231) {#part0032_split_006.html#h1-231 .level1a}

^51^ Pain demonstrates the body must be real. It is a loud, obscuring
voice whose shrieks would silence what the Holy Spirit says and keep His
words from your awareness. Pain compels attention, drawing it away from
Him and focusing upon itself. Its purpose is the same as pleasure, for
they both are means to make the body real. What shares a common purpose
is the same. This is the law of purpose, which unites all those who
share in it within itself. Pleasure and pain are equally unreal, because
their purpose cannot *be* achieved. Thus are they means for nothing, for
they have a goal without a meaning. And they share the lack of meaning
which their purpose has.

^52^ Sin shifts from pain to pleasure and again to pain. For either
witness is the same and carries but one message: "You are here within
this body, and you can be hurt. You can have pleasure, too, but only at
the cost of pain." These witnesses are joined by many more. Each one
seems different because it has a different name, and so it seems to
answer to a different sound. Except for this, the witnesses of sin are
all alike. Call pleasure pain, and it will hurt. Call pain a pleasure,
and the pain behind the pleasure will be felt no more. Sin's witnesses
but shift from name to name, as one steps forward and another back. Yet
which is foremost makes no difference. Sin's witnesses hear but the call
of death.

^53^ This body, purposeless within itself, holds all your memories and
all your hopes. You use its eyes to see, its ears to hear, and let it
tell you what it is it feels. *It does not know.* It tells you but the
names you gave it to use when *you* call forth the witnesses to its
reality. You cannot choose among them which are real, for any one you
choose is like the rest. This name or that, but nothing more, you
choose. You do not make a witness true because you called him by truth's
name. The truth is found in him if it is truth he *represents*. And
otherwise he lies, if you should call him by the holy Name of God
Himself.

^54^ God's Witness sees no witnesses *against* the body. Neither does He
harken to the witnesses by other names which speak in other ways for its
reality. He *knows* it is not real. For nothing could contain what you
believe it holds within. Nor could it tell a part of God Himself what it
should feel and what its function is. Yet must He love whatever you hold
dear. And for each witness to the body's death He sends a witness to
your life in Him Who knows no death. Each miracle He brings is witness
that the body is not real. Its pains and pleasures does He heal alike,
for *all* sin's witnesses do His replace.

^55^ The miracle makes no distinctions in the names by which sin's
witnesses are called. It merely proves that what they represent has no
effects. And this it proves because its own effects have come to take
their place. It matters not the name by which you called your suffering.
It is no longer there. The One Who brings the miracle perceived them all
as one and called by name of fear. As fear is witness unto death, so is
the miracle the witness unto life. It is a witness no one can deny, for
it is the *effects* of life it brings. The dying live, the dead arise,
and pain has vanished. Yet a miracle speaks not but for itself, but what
it represents.

^56^ Love, too, has symbols in a world of sin. The miracle forgives
because it stands for what is past forgiveness and is true. How foolish
and insane it is to think a miracle is bound by laws which it came
solely to undo! The laws of sin have different witnesses with different
strengths. And they attest to different sufferings. Yet to the One Who
sends forth miracles to bless the world, a tiny stab of pain, a little
worldly pleasure, and the throes of death itself are but a single
sound-a call for healing and a plaintive cry for help within a world of
misery. It is their *sameness* that the miracle attests. It is their
sameness that it *proves*.

^57^ The laws which call them different are dissolved and *shown* as
powerless. The purpose of a miracle is to accomplish this. And God
Himself has guaranteed the strength of miracles for what they witness
to. Be witnesses unto the miracle and not the laws of sin. There is no
need to suffer any more. But there *is* need that you be healed because
the suffering of the world has made it deaf to its salvation and
deliverance.

^58^ The resurrection of the world awaits your healing and your
happiness that you may demonstrate the healing of the world. The holy
instant will replace all sin if you but carry its effects with you. And
no one will elect to suffer more. What better function could you serve
than this? Be healed that you may heal, and suffer not the laws of sin
to be applied to you. And truth will be revealed to you who chose to let
love's symbols take the place of sin.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Illusion of Suffering**](#part0004.html#level-232) {#part0032_split_007.html#h1-232 .level1a}

^59^ Suffering is an emphasis upon all that the world has done to injure
you. Here is the world's demented version of salvation clearly shown.
Like to a dream of punishment in which the dreamer is unconscious of
what brought on the attack against himself, he sees himself attacked
unjustly and by something not himself. He is the victim of this
"something else," a thing outside himself for which he has no reason to
be held responsible. He must be innocent because he knows not what he
does, but what is done to him. Yet is his own attack upon himself
apparent still, for it is he who bears the suffering. And he cannot
escape because its source is seen outside himself.

^60^ Now you are being shown you *can* escape. All that is needed is you
look upon the problem as it *is,* and not the way that you have set it
up. How could there be another way to solve a problem which is very
simple but has been obscured by heavy clouds of complication which were
made to *keep* the problem unresolved? Without the clouds, the problem
will emerge in all its primitive simplicity. The choice will not be
difficult, because the problem is absurd when clearly seen. No one has
difficulty making up his mind to let a simple problem be resolved if it
is *seen* as hurting him and also very easily removed.

^61^ The "reasoning" by which the world is made, on which it rests, by
which it is maintained, is simply this: "*You* are the cause of what I
do. Your presence *justifies* my wrath, and you exist and think *apart*
from me. While you attack, I must be innocent. And what I suffer from is
your attack." No one who looks upon this "reasoning" exactly as it is
could fail to see it does not follow, and it makes no sense. Yet it
seems sensible because it *looks* as if the world were hurting you. And
so it seems as if there is no need to go beyond the obvious in terms of
cause.

^62^ There is *indeed* a need. The world's escape from condemnation is a
need which those within the world are joined in sharing. Yet they do not
recognize their common need. For each one thinks that if he does his
part, the condemnation of the world will rest on him. And it is this
that he perceives to *be* his part in its deliverance. Vengeance must
have a focus. Otherwise is the avenger's knife in his own hand and
pointed to himself. And he must see it in another's hand if he would be
a victim of attack he did not choose. And thus he suffers from the
wounds a knife he does not hold has made upon himself. This is the
*purpose* of the world he sees. And looked at thus, the world provides
the means by which this purpose seems to be fulfilled.

^63^ The means *attest* the purpose but are not themselves a cause. Nor
will the cause be changed by seeing it apart from its effects. The cause
*produces* the effects which then bear witness to the cause and not
themselves. Look, then, beyond effects. It is not here the cause of
suffering and sin must lie. And dwell not on the suffering and sin, for
they are but reflections of their cause.

^64^ The part you play in salvaging the world from condemnation is your
*own* escape. Forget not that the witness to the world of evil cannot
speak except for what has seen a need for evil in the world. And this is
where your guilt was first beheld. In separation from your brother was
the first attack upon yourself begun. And it is this the world bears
witness to. Seek not another cause nor look among the mighty legions of
its witnesses for its undoing. They *support* its claim on your
allegiance. What conceals the truth is not where you should look to
*find* the truth. The witnesses to sin all stand within one little
space. And it is *here* you find the cause of your perspective on the
world.

^65^ Once you were unaware of what the cause of everything the world
appeared to thrust upon you, uninvited and unasked, must really be. Of
one thing you were sure-of all the many causes you perceived as bringing
pain and suffering to you, your guilt was not among them. Nor did you in
any way request them for yourself. This is how *all* illusions come
about. The one who makes them does not see himself as making them, and
their reality does not depend on him. Whatever cause they have is
something quite apart from him, and what he sees is *separate* from his
mind. He cannot doubt his dreams' reality because he does not see the
part he plays in making them and making them seem real.

^66^ No one can waken from a dream the world is dreaming *for* him. He
becomes a part of someone else's dream. He cannot choose to waken from a
dream he did not make. Helpless he stands, a victim to a dream conceived
and cherished by a separate mind. Careless indeed of him this mind must
be, as thoughtless of his peace and happiness as is the weather or the
time of day. It loves him not but casts him as it will in any role that
satisfies its dream. So little is his worth that he is but a dancing
shadow, leaping up and down according to a senseless plot conceived
within the idle dreaming of the world.

^67^ This is the only picture you can see, the one alternative that you
can choose, the other possibility of cause if you be *not* the dreamer
of your dreams. And this is what you choose, if you deny the cause of
suffering is in *your* mind. Be glad indeed it is, for thus are you the
*one* decider of your destiny in time. The choice is yours to make
between a sleeping death and dreams of evil or a happy wakening and joy
of life. What could you choose between *but* life or death, waking or
sleeping, peace or war, your dreams or your reality? Yet if the choice
is really given you, then you must see the causes of the things you
choose between exactly *as* they are and *where* they are. What choices
can be made between two states, but one of which is clearly recognized?
Who could be free to choose between effects when only one is seen as up
to him?

^68^ An honest choice could never be perceived as one in which the
choice is split between a tiny you and an enormous world, with different
dreams about the truth in you. The gap between reality and dreams lies
not between the dreaming of the world and what you dream in secret.
*They* are one. The dreaming of the world is but a part of your own
dream you gave away and saw as if it were its start and ending both. Yet
was it started by *your* secret dream, which you do not perceive,
although it caused the part you see and do not doubt is real. How could
you doubt it while you lie asleep and dream in secret that its cause is
real?

^69^ A brother separated from yourself, an ancient enemy, a murderer who
stalks you in the night and plots your death, yet plans that it be
lingering and slow-of this you dream. Yet underneath this dream is yet
another in which you become the murderer, the secret enemy, the
scavenger and the destroyer of your brother and the world alike. Here is
the *cause* of suffering, the space between your dreams and your
reality. The little gap you do not even see, the birthplace of illusions
and of fear, the time of terror and of ancient hate, the instant of
disaster, all are here. Here is the *cause* of unreality. And it is here
that it will be undone.

^70^ *You* are the dreamer of the world of dreams. No other cause it
has, nor ever will. Nothing more fearful than an idle dream has
terrified God's Son and made him think that he has lost his innocence,
denied his Father, and made war upon himself. So fearful is the dream,
so seeming real, he could not waken to reality without the sweat of
terror and a scream of mortal fear unless a gentler dream preceded his
awaking and allowed his calmer mind to welcome, not to fear, the Voice
that calls with love to waken him. \[A gentler dream, in which his
suffering was healed and where his brother was his friend.\] God willed
he waken gently and with joy. And gave him means to waken without fear.
Accept the dream He gave instead of yours. It is not difficult to change
a dream when once the dreamer has been recognized.

^71^ Rest in the Holy Spirit and allow His gentle dreams to take the
place of those you dreamed in terror and in fear of death. He brings
forgiving dreams in which the choice is not who is the murderer and who
shall be the victim. In the dreams He brings, there *is* no murder and
there *is* no death. The dream of guilt is fading from your sight,
although your eyes are closed. A smile has come to lighten up your
sleeping face. The sleep is peaceful now, for these are happy dreams.

^72^ Dream softly of your sinless brother, who unites with you in holy
innocence. And from this dream, the Lord of Heaven will Himself awaken
His beloved Son. Dream of your brother's kindnesses instead of dwelling
in your dreams on his mistakes. Select his thoughtfulness to dream about
instead of counting up the hurts he gave. Forgive him his illusions and
give thanks to him for all the helpfulness he gave. And do not brush
aside his many gifts because he is not perfect in your dreams.

^73^ He represents his Father, Whom you see as offering both life and
death to you. Brother, He gives but life. Yet what you see as gifts your
brother offers represent the gifts you dream your Father gives to you.
Let all your brother's gifts be seen in light of charity and kindness
offered you. And let no pain disturb your dream of deep appreciation for
his gifts to you.
:::

[]{#part0032_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. The "Hero" of the Dream**](#part0004.html#level-233) {#part0032_split_008.html#h1-233 .level1a}

^74^ The body is the central figure in the dreaming of the world. There
is no dream without it, nor does it exist without the dream in which it
acts as if it were a person, to be seen and be believed. It takes the
central place in every dream, which tells the story of how it was made
by other bodies, born into the world outside the body, lives a little
while and dies, to be united in the dust with other bodies dying like
itself. In the brief time allotted it to live, it seeks for other bodies
as its friends and enemies. Its safety is its main concern. Its comfort
is its guiding rule. It tries to look for pleasure and avoid the things
that would be hurtful. Above all, it tries to teach itself its pains and
joys are different and can be told apart.

^75^ The dreaming of the world takes many forms, because the body seeks
in many ways to prove it is autonomous and real. It puts things on
itself which it has bought with little metal discs or paper strips the
world proclaims as valuable and good. It works to get them, doing
senseless things, and tosses them away for senseless things it does not
need and does not even want. It hires other bodies, that they may
protect it, and collect more senseless things that it can call its own.
It looks about for special bodies which can share its dream. Sometimes
it dreams it is a conqueror of bodies weaker than itself. But in some
phases of the dream, it is the slave of bodies that would hurt and
torture it.

^76^ The body's serial adventures from the time of birth to dying is the
theme of every dream the world has ever had. The "hero" of this dream
will never change nor will its purpose. Though the dream itself takes
many forms and seems to show a great variety of places and events
wherein its "hero" finds itself, the dream has but one purpose, taught
in many ways. This single lesson does it try to teach again, and still
again, and yet once more that it is *cause* and *not* effect. And *you*
are its effect and *cannot* be its cause.

^77^ Thus are you not the dreamer but the *dream*. And so you wander
idly in and out of places and events which *it* contrives. That this is
all the body does is true, for it *is* but a figure in a dream. But who
reacts to figures in a dream unless he sees them as if they were real?
The instant that he sees them as they *are,* they have no more effects
on him because he understands he *gave* them their effects by causing
them and making them seem real.

^78^ How willing are you to escape effects of all the dreams the world
has ever had? Is it your wish to let no dream appear to be the cause of
what it is you do? Then let us merely look upon the dream's beginning,
for the part you see is but the second part, whose cause lies in the
first. No one asleep and dreaming in the world remembers his attack upon
himself. No one believes there really was a time when he knew nothing of
a body and could never have conceived this world as real. He would have
seen at once that these ideas are one illusion, too ridiculous for
anything but to be laughed away. How serious they now appear to be! And
no one can remember when they would have met with laughter and with
disbelief.

^79^ We *can* remember this if we but look directly at their cause. And
we will see the grounds for laughter, not a cause for fear. Let us
return the dream he gave away unto the dreamer who perceives the dream
as separate from himself and done to him. Into eternity, where all is
one, there crept a tiny mad idea at which the Son of God remembered not
to laugh. In his forgetting did the thought become a serious idea and
possible of both accomplishment and real effects. Together, we can laugh
them both away and understand that time cannot intrude upon eternity. It
*is* a joke to think that time can come to circumvent eternity, which
*means* there is no time.

^80^ A timelessness in which is time made real; a part of God which can
attack itself; a separate brother as an enemy; a mind within a body, all
are forms of circularity whose ending starts at its beginning, ending at
its cause. The world you see depicts exactly what you thought you did.
Except that now you think that what you did is being done to you. The
guilt for what you thought is being placed outside yourself and on a
guilty world which dreams your dreams and thinks your thoughts instead
of you. It brings its vengeance, not your own. It keeps you narrowly
confined within a body, which it punishes because of all the sinful
things the body does within its dream. You have no power to make the
body stop its evil deeds because you did not make it and cannot control
its actions or its purpose or its fate.

^81^ The world but demonstrates an ancient truth-you will believe that
others do to you *exactly* what you think you did to them. But once
deluded into blaming them, you will not see the cause of what they do
because you *want* the guilt to rest on them. How childish is this
petulant device to keep your innocence by pushing guilt outside yourself
but never letting go! It is not easy to perceive the jest when all
around you do your eyes behold its heavy consequences, but without their
trifling cause. Without the cause do its effects seem serious and sad
indeed. Yet they but follow. And it is their *cause* which follows
nothing and is but a jest.

^82^ In gentle laughter does the Holy Spirit perceive the cause and
looks not to effects. How else could He correct your error, who have
overlooked the cause entirely? He bids you bring each terrible effect to
Him that you may look together on its foolish cause and laugh with Him a
while. *You* judge effects, but *He* has judged their cause. And by His
judgment are effects removed. Perhaps you come in tears, but hear Him
say, "My brother, Holy Son of God, behold your idle dream in which this
could occur," and you will leave the holy instant with your laughter and
your brother's joined with His.

^83^ The secret of salvation is but this: that *you* are doing this unto
yourself. No matter what the form of the attack, this still is true.
Whoever takes the role of enemy and of attacker, still is this the
truth. Whatever seems to be the cause of any pain and suffering you
feel, this is still true. For you would not react at all to figures in a
dream you knew that *you* were dreaming. Let them be as hateful and as
vicious as they may, they could have no effect on you unless you failed
to recognize it is *your* dream. This single lesson learned will set you
free from suffering, whatever form it takes.

^84^ The Holy Spirit will repeat this one inclusive lesson of
deliverance until it has been learned, regardless of the form of
suffering that brings you pain. Whatever hurt you bring to Him He will
make answer with this very simple truth. For this one answer takes away
the *cause* of every form of sorrow and of pain. The form affects His
answer not at all, for He would teach you but the single cause of all of
them, no matter what their form. And you will understand that miracles
reflect the simple statement,

^85^ I have done this thing, and it is this I would undo.

^86^ Bring, then, all forms of suffering to Him Who knows that every one
is like the rest. He sees no differences where none exist, and He will
teach you how each one is caused. None has a different cause from all
the rest, and all of them are easily undone by but a single lesson truly
learned. Salvation is a secret you have kept but from yourself. The
universe proclaims it so. Yet to its witnesses you pay no heed at all.
For they attest the thing you do not *want* to know. They seem to keep
it secret from you. Yet you need but learn you choose but *not* to
listen, *not* to see. How differently will you perceive the world when
this is recognized! When you forgive the world your guilt, *you* will be
free of it. Its innocence does *not* demand your guilt, nor does *your*
guiltlessness rest on its sins.

^87^ This is the obvious-a secret kept from no one but yourself. And it
is this that has maintained you separate from the world and kept your
brother separate from you. Now need you but to learn that *both* of you
are innocent or guilty. The one thing that is impossible is that you be
unlike each other; that they *both* be true. This is the only secret yet
to learn. And it will be no secret you are healed.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 28**](#part0004.html#chap-28) {#part0033_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Undoing of Fear**](#part0004.html#chap-28) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-234) {#part0033_split_000.html#h1-234 .level1a1}

^28:1^ The miracle does nothing. All it does is to *undo*. And thus it
cancels out the interference to what has been done. It does not add, but
merely takes away. And what it takes away is long since gone, but being
kept in memory, appears to have immediate effects. This world was over
long ago. The thoughts that made it are no longer in the mind that
thought of them and loved them for a little while. The miracle but shows
the past is gone, and what has truly gone has no effects. Remembering a
cause can but produce illusions of its presence, not effects.

^2^ All the effects of guilt are here no more. For guilt is over. In its
passing went its consequences, left without a cause. Why would you cling
to it in memory if you did not *desire* its effects? Remembering is as
selective as perception, being its past tense. It is perception of the
past as if it were occurring now and still were there to see. Memory,
like perception, is a skill made up by you to take the place of what God
gave in your creation. And like all the things you made, it can be used
to serve another purpose and to be the means for something else. It can
be used to heal and not to hurt if you so wish it be.

^3^ Nothing employed for healing represents an effort to do anything at
all. It is a recognition that you have no needs which mean that
something must be done. It is an unselective memory, which is not used
to interfere with truth. All things the Holy Spirit can employ for
healing have been given Him, without the content and the purposes for
which they have been made. They are but skills without an application.
They *await* their use. They have no dedication and no aim.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Present Memory**](#part0004.html#level-235) {#part0033_split_001.html#h1-235 .level1a}

^4^ The Holy Spirit can indeed make use of memory, for God Himself is
there. Yet this is not a memory of past events, but only of a present
state. You are so long accustomed to believe that memory holds only what
is past that it is hard for you to realize it is a skill that can
remember *now*. The limitations on remembering the world imposes on it
are as vast as those you let the world impose on you. There *is* no link
of memory to the past. If you would have it there, then there it is. But
only your *desire* made the link, and only you have held it to a part of
time where guilt appears to linger still.

^5^ The Holy Spirit's use of memory is quite apart from time. He does
not seek to use it as a means to keep the past, but rather as a way to
let it *go*. Memory holds the message it receives and does what it is
given it to do. It does not write the message nor appoint what it is
for. Like to the body, it is purposeless within itself. And if it seems
to serve to cherish ancient hate and offers you the pictures of
injustices and hurts which you were saving, this is what you asked its
message be, and this is what it is. Committed to its vaults, the history
of all the body's past is hidden there. All of the strange associations
made to keep the past alive, the present dead, are stored within it,
waiting your command that they be brought to you and lived again. And
thus do their effects appear to be increased by time, which took away
their cause.

^6^ Yet time is but another phase of what does nothing. It works hand in
hand with all the other attributes with which you seek to keep concealed
the truth about yourself. Time neither takes away nor can restore. And
yet you make strange use of it, as if the past had caused the present,
which is but a consequence in which no change can be made possible
because its cause has gone. Yet change must have a cause that will
endure or else it will not last. No change can be made in the present if
its cause is past. Only the past is held in memory as you make use of
it, and so it is a way to hold the past *against* the now.

^7^ Remember *nothing* that you taught yourself, for you were badly
taught. And who would keep a senseless lesson in his mind when he can
learn and can preserve a better one? When ancient memories of hate
appear, remember that their cause is gone. And so you cannot understand
what they are for. Let not the cause that you would give them now be
what it was which made them what they were or seemed to be. Be glad that
it is gone, for this is what you would be pardoned from. And see instead
the new effects of cause accepted *now,* with consequences *here.* They
will surprise you with their loveliness. The ancient new ideas they
bring will be the happy consequences of a cause so ancient that it far
exceeds the span of memory which your perception sees.

^8^ This is the Cause the Holy Spirit has remembered for you, when you
would forget. It is not past because He let It not be unremembered. It
has never changed because there never was a time in which He did not
keep It safely in your mind. Its consequences will indeed seem new
because you thought that you remembered not their Cause. Yet was It
never absent from your mind, for it was not your Father's Will that He
be unremembered by His Son.

^9^ What *you* remember never was. It came from causelessness which you
confused with cause. It can deserve but laughter when you learn you have
remembered consequences which were causeless and could *never* be
effects. The miracle reminds you of a Cause forever present, perfectly
untouched by time and interference. Never changed from what It *is.* And
*you* are Its effects, as changeless and as perfect as Itself. Its
memory does not lie in the past nor await the future. It is not revealed
in miracles. They but remind you that It has not gone. When you forgive
It for your sins, It will no longer be denied.

^10^ You who have sought to lay a judgment on your own Creator cannot
understand it is not He Who laid a judgment on His Son. You would deny
Him His effects, yet have they never been denied. There was no time in
which His Son could be condemned for what was causeless and against His
Will. What your remembering would witness to is but the fear of God. He
has not done the thing you fear. No more have you. And so your innocence
has not been lost. You need no healing to be healed. In quietness, see
in the miracle a lesson in allowing Cause to have Its *own* effects and
doing nothing that would interfere.

^11^ The miracle comes quietly into the mind that stops an instant and
is still. It reaches gently from that quiet time, and from the mind it
healed in quiet then, to other minds to share its quietness. And they
will join in doing nothing to prevent its radiant extension back into
the Mind Which caused all minds to be. Born out of sharing, there can be
no pause in time to cause the miracle delay in hastening to all unquiet
minds and bringing them an instant's stillness when the memory of God
returns to them. Their own remembering is quiet now, and what has come
to take its place will not be wholly unremembered afterwards.

^12^ He to Whom time is given offers thanks for every quiet instant
given Him. For in that instant is His memory allowed to offer all its
treasures to the Son of God, for whom they have been kept. How gladly
does He offer them unto the one for whom He has been given them! And His
Creator shares His thanks because He would not be deprived of His
effects. The instant's silence that His Son accepts gives welcome to
eternity and Him and lets Them enter where They would abide. For in that
instant does the Son of God do nothing that would make himself afraid.

^13^ How instantly the memory of God arises in the mind that has no fear
to keep the memory away. Its own remembering has gone. There is no past
to keep its fearful image in the way of glad awakening to present peace.
The trumpets of eternity resound throughout the stillness, yet disturb
it not. And what is now remembered is not fear, but rather is the cause
that fear was made to render unremembered and undone. The stillness
speaks in gentle sounds of love the Son of God remembers from before his
own remembering came in between the present and the past to shut them
out.

^14^ Now is the Son of God at last aware of present Cause and Its benign
effects. Now does he understand what he has made is causeless, making no
effects at all. He has done nothing. And in seeing this, he understands
he never had a need for doing anything and never did. His Cause *is* its
effects. There never was a cause beside It that could generate a
different past or future. Its effects are changelessly eternal, beyond
fear, and past the world of sin entirely.

^15^ What has been lost, to see the causeless not? And where is
sacrifice, when memory of God has come to take the place of loss? What
better way to close the little gap between illusions and reality than to
allow the memory of God to flow across it, making it a bridge an instant
will suffice to reach beyond? For God has closed it with Himself. His
memory has not gone by and left a stranded Son forever on a shore where
he can glimpse another shore which he can never reach. His Father wills
that he be lifted up and gently carried over. *He* has built the bridge,
and it is He Who will transport His Son across it. Have no fear that He
will fail in what He wills. Nor that you be excluded from the Will that
is for you.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Reversing Effect and Cause**](#part0004.html#level-236) {#part0033_split_002.html#h1-236 .level1a}

^16^ Without a cause there can be no effects, and yet without effects
there is no cause. The cause a cause is *made* by its effects; the
Father is a father by His Son. Effects do not create their cause, but
they establish its causation. Thus, the Son gives fatherhood to his
Creator and receives the gift that he has given Him. It is *because* he
is God's Son that he must also be a father who creates as God created
him. The circle of creation has no end. Its starting and its ending are
the same. But in itself it holds the universe of all creation, without
beginning and without an end.

^17^ Fatherhood *is* creation. Love must be extended. Purity is not
confined. It is the nature of the innocent to be forever uncontained,
without a barrier or limitation. Thus is purity not of the body. Nor can
it be found where limitation is. The body can be healed by its effects,
which are as limitless as is itself. Yet must all healing come about
because the mind is recognized as not within the body, and its innocence
is quite apart from it and where *all* healing is. Where then is
healing? Only where its cause is given its effects. For sickness is a
meaningless attempt to give effects to causelessness and *make* it be a
cause.

^18^ Always in sickness does the Son of God attempt to make himself his
cause and not allow himself to be his Father's Son. For this impossible
desire, he does not believe that he is Love's effect and must be cause
because of what he is. The cause of healing is the only Cause of
everything. It has but *one* effect. And in that recognition,
causelessness is given no effects and none are seen. A mind within a
body and a world of other bodies, each with separate minds, are your
"creations," you the "other" mind, creating with effects unlike
yourself. And as their "father," you must be like them. Nothing at all
has happened but that you have put yourself to sleep and dreamed a dream
in which you were an alien to yourself and but a part of someone else's
dream.

^19^ The miracle does not awaken you but merely shows you who the
dreamer *is*. It teaches you there is a choice of dreams while you are
still asleep, depending on the purpose of your dreaming. Do you wish for
dreams of healing or for dreams of death? A dream is like a memory in
that it pictures what you *wanted* shown to you. An empty storehouse
with an open door holds all your shreds of memories and dreams. Yet if
you are the dreamer, you perceive this much at least-that *you* have
caused the dream and can accept another dream as well. But for this
change in content of the dream, it must be realized that it is you who
dreamed the dreaming that you do not like. It is but an effect which
*you* have caused, and you would not *be* cause of this effect.

^20^ In dreams of murder and attack are you the victim in a dying body
slain. But in forgiving dreams is no one asked to be the victim and the
sufferer. These are the happy dreams the miracle exchanges for your own.
It does not ask you make another-only that you see you made the one you
would exchange for this. This world is causeless, as is every dream that
anyone has dreamed within the world. No plans are possible and no design
exists that could be found and understood.

^21^ What else could be expected from a thing that has no cause? Yet if
it has no cause, it has no purpose. You may cause a dream, but never
will you give it real effects. For that would change its cause, and it
is this you cannot do. The dreamer of a dream is not awake but does not
know he sleeps. He sees illusions of himself as sick or well, depressed
or happy, but without a stable cause with guaranteed effects.

^22^ The miracle establishes you dream a dream and that its content is
not true. This is a crucial step in dealing with illusions. No one is
afraid of them when he perceives he made them up. The fear was held in
place *because* he did not see that he was author of the dream, and not
a figure in the dream. He gives *himself* the consequences which he
dreams he gave his brother. And it is but this the dream has put
together and has offered him to show him that his wishes have been done.
Thus does he fear his *own* attack but sees it at another's hands. As
victim, he is suffering from its effects but not their cause. He
authored not his own attack, and he is innocent of what he caused. The
miracle does nothing but to show him that he has done nothing. What he
fears is cause without the consequences which would *make* it cause. And
so it never was.

^23^ The separation started with the dream the Father was deprived of
His effects and powerless to keep them since He was no longer their
Creator. In the dream, the dreamer made himself, but what he made has
turned against him, taking on the role of its creator as the dreamer
had. And as he hated his Creator, so the figures in the dream have hated
him. His body is their slave which they abuse because the motives he has
given it have they adopted as their own. And hate it for the vengeance
it would offer them. It is their vengeance on the body which appears to
prove the dreamer could not be the maker of the dream. Effect and cause
are first split off and then reversed, so that effect becomes a cause;
the cause, effect.

^24^ This is the separation's final step with which salvation, which
proceeds to go the *other* way, begins. This final step is an effect of
what has gone before, appearing as a cause. The miracle is the first
step in giving back to cause the function of causation, not effect. For
this confusion has produced the dream, and while it lasts, will wakening
be feared. Nor will the call to wakening be heard, because it seems to
be the call to fear.

^25^ Like every lesson which the Holy Spirit requests you learn, the
miracle is clear. It demonstrates what He would have you learn and shows
you its effect are what you *want*. In His forgiving dreams are the
effects of yours undone and hated enemies perceived as friends with
merciful intent. Their enmity is seen as causeless now, because they did
not make it. And you can accept the role of maker of their hate, because
you *see* that it has no effects. Now are you freed from this much of
the dream; the world is neutral, and the bodies which still seem to move
about as separate things need not be feared. And so they are not sick.

^26^ The miracle returns the cause of fear to you who made it. But it
also shows that, having no effects, it is not cause because the function
of causation is to have effects. And where effects are gone, there *is*
no cause. Thus is the body healed by miracles because they show the mind
*made* sickness and employed the body to be victim or effect of what it
made. Yet half the lesson will not teach the whole. The miracle is
useless if you learn but that the body can be healed, for this is not
the lesson it was sent to teach. The lesson is the *mind* was sick that
thought the body could be sick; projecting out its guilt caused nothing
and had no effects.

^27^ This world is full of miracles. They stand in shining silence next
to every dream of pain and suffering, of sin and guilt. They are the
dream's alternative, the choice to be the dreamer rather than deny the
active role in making up the dream. They are the glad effects of taking
back the consequence of sickness to its cause. The body is released
because the mind acknowledges "this is not done to me, but *I* am doing
this." And thus the mind is free to make another choice instead.
Beginning here, salvation will proceed to change the course of every
step in the descent to separation, until all the steps have been
retraced, the ladder gone, and all the dreaming of the world undone.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Agreement to Join**](#part0004.html#level-237) {#part0033_split_003.html#h1-237 .level1a}

^28^ What waits in perfect certainty beyond salvation is not our
concern. For you have barely started to allow your first uncertain steps
to be directed up the ladder separation led you down. The miracle alone
is your concern at present. Here is where we must begin. And having
started, will the way be made serene and simple in the rising up to
waking and the ending of the dream. When you accept a miracle, you do
not add your dream of fear to one that is already being dreamed. Without
support, the dream will fade away without effects. For it is *your*
support that strengthens it.

^29^ No mind is sick until another mind agrees that they are separate.
And thus it is their *joint* decision to be sick. If you withhold
agreement and accept the part *you* play in making sickness real, the
other mind cannot project its guilt without your aid in letting it
perceive itself as separate and apart from you. Thus is the body not
perceived as sick by both your minds, from separate points of view.
Uniting with a brother's mind prevents the *cause* of sickness and
perceived effects. Healing is the effect of minds which join, as
sickness comes from minds which separate.

^30^ The miracle does nothing just *because* the minds are joined and
cannot separate. Yet in the dreaming has this been reversed, and
separate minds are seen as bodies which are separated and which cannot
join. Do not allow your brother to be sick, for if he is, have you
abandoned him to his own dream by sharing it with him. He has not seen
the cause of sickness where it is, and you have overlooked the gap
between you, where the sickness has been bred. Thus are you *joined* in
sickness, to preserve the little gap unhealed, where sickness is kept
carefully protected, cherished, and upheld by firm belief, lest God
should come to bridge the little gap that leads to Him. Fight not His
coming with illusions, for it is His coming that you want above all
things that seem to glisten in the dream.

^31^ The end of dreaming is the end of fear, and love was never in the
world of dreams. The gap *is* little. Yet it holds the seeds of
pestilence and every form of ill because it is a wish to keep apart and
not to join. And thus it seems to give a cause to sickness which is
*not* its cause. The *purpose* of the gap is all the cause that sickness
has. For it was made to keep you separated in a body which you see as if
*it* were the cause of pain.

^32^ The cause of pain is separation, not the body, which is only its
effect. Yet separation is but empty space, enclosing nothing, doing
nothing, and as unsubstantial as the empty place between the ripples
that a ship has made in passing by. And covered just as fast, as water
rushes in to close the gap and as the waves in joining cover it. Where
is the gap between the waves when they have joined and covered up the
space which seemed to keep them separate for a little while? Where are
the grounds for sickness when the minds have joined to close the little
gap between them where the seeds of sickness seemed to grow?

^33^ God builds the bridge, but only in the space left clean and vacant
by the miracle. The seeds of sickness and the shame of guilt He cannot
bridge, for He cannot destroy the alien will that He created not. Let
its effects be gone and clutch them not with eager hands, to keep them
for yourself. The miracle will brush them all aside and thus make room
for Him Who wills to come and bridge His Son's returning to Himself.

^34^ Count, then, the silver miracles and golden dreams of happiness as
all the treasures you would keep within the storehouse of the world. The
door is open, not to thieves but to your starving brothers who mistook
for gold the shining of a pebble and who stored a heap of snow that
shone like silver. They have nothing left behind the open door. What is
the world except a little gap perceived to tear eternity apart and break
it into days and months and years? And what are you who live within the
world except a picture of the Son of God in broken pieces, each
concealed within a separate and uncertain bit of clay?

^35^ Be not afraid, but let your world be lit by miracles. And where the
gap was seen to stand between you, join your brother there. And sickness
will be seen *without* a cause. The dream of healing in forgiveness lies
and gently shows you that you never sinned. The miracle would leave no
proof of guilt to bring you witness to what never was. And in your
storehouse it will make a place of welcome for your Father and your
Self. The door is open that all those may come who would no longer
starve and would enjoy the feast of plenty set before them there. And
they will meet with your invited Guests the miracle has asked to come to
you.

^36^ This is a feast unlike indeed to those the dreaming of the world
has shown. For here, the more that anyone receives, the more is left for
all the rest to share. The Guests have brought unlimited supply with
Them. And no one is deprived or can deprive. Here is a feast the Father
lays before His Son and shares it equally with him. And in Their sharing
there can *be* no gap in which abundance falters and grows thin. Here
can the lean years enter not, for time waits not upon this feast, which
has no end. For Love has set Its table in the space that seemed to keep
your Guests apart from you.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Greater Joining**](#part0004.html#level-238) {#part0033_split_004.html#h1-238 .level1a}

^37^ Accepting the Atonement for yourself means not to give support to
someone's dream of sickness and of death. It means that you share not
his wish to separate and let him turn illusions on himself. Nor do you
wish that they be turned instead on you. Thus have they *no* effects.
And you are free of dreams of pain because you let him be. Unless you
help him, you will suffer pain with him because that is your wish. And
you become a figure in his dream of pain, as he in yours. So do you both
become illusions and without identity. You could be anyone or anything,
depending on whose evil dream you share. You can be sure of just one
thing-that you are evil, for you share in dreams of fear.

^38^ There is a way of finding certainty right *here* and *now.* Refuse
to be a part of fearful dreams whatever form they take, for you *will*
lose identity in them. You *find* yourself by not accepting them as
causing you and giving you effects. You stand apart from them but not
apart from him who dreams them. Thus you separate the dreamer from the
dream and join in one but let the other *go*. The dream is but illusion
in the mind. And with the mind you *would* unite, but *never* with the
dream. It is the dream you fear and *not* the mind. You see them as the
same because you think that *you* are but a dream. And what is real and
what is but illusion in yourself you do not know and cannot tell apart.

^39^ Like you, your brother thinks he is a dream. Share not in his
illusion of himself, for your identity depends on his reality. Think
rather of him as a mind in which illusions still persist, but as a mind
which brother is to you. He is not brother made by what he dreams, nor
is his body, "hero" of the dream, your brother. It is his *reality* that
is your brother, as is yours to him. Your mind and his are joined in
brotherhood. His body and his dreams but seem to make a little gap,
where yours have joined with his.

^40^ And yet, between your minds there *is* no gap. To join his dreams
is thus to meet him not because his dreams would separate from you.
Therefore, release him, merely by your claim on brotherhood and not on
dreams of fear. Let him acknowledge who he is by not supporting his
illusions by your faith, for if you do, you will have faith in *yours.*
With faith in yours, *he* will not be released, and *you* are kept in
bondage to his dream. And dreams of fear will haunt the little gap,
inhabited but by illusions which you have supported in each other's
minds.

^41^ Be certain, if you do your part, he will do his, for he will join
you where you stand. Call not to him to meet you in the gap between you,
or you must believe that it is your reality as well as his. You *cannot*
do his part, but this you *do* when you become a passive figure in his
dream instead of dreamer of your own. Identity in dreams is meaningless
because the dreamer and the dream are one. Who *shares* a dream must
*be* the dream he shares because by sharing is a cause produced.

^42^ You share confusion and you *are* confused, for in the gap no
stable self exists. What is the same seems different because what is the
same appears to be unlike. His dreams are yours because you *let* them
be. But if you took your own away would he be free of them and of his
own as well. Your dreams are witnesses to his, and his attest the truth
of yours. Yet if you see there *is* no truth in yours, his dreams will
go, and he will understand what *made* the dream.

^43^ The Holy Spirit is in *both* your minds, and He is One because
there is no gap that separates His Oneness from Itself. The gap between
your bodies matters not, for what is joined in Him is *always* one. No
one is sick if someone else accepts his union with him. His desire to be
a sick and separated mind cannot remain without a witness or a cause.
And *both* are gone if someone wills to be united with him. He has
dreams that he was separated from his brother who, by sharing not his
dream, has left the space between them vacant. And the Father comes to
join His Son the Holy Spirit joined.

^44^ The Holy Spirit's function is to take the broken picture of the Son
of God and put the pieces into place again. This holy picture, healed
entirely, does He hold out to every separate piece that thinks it is a
picture in itself. To each he offers his identity, which the whole
picture represents, instead of just a little broken bit which he
insisted was himself. And when he sees *this* picture, he will recognize
himself. If you share not your brother's evil dream, this *is* the
picture that the miracle will place within the little gap, left clean of
all the seeds of sickness and of sin. And here the Father will receive
His Son, because His Son was gracious to himself.

^45^ I thank you, Father, knowing you will come to close each little gap
that lies between the broken pieces of Your holy Son. Your holiness,
complete and perfect, lies in every one of them. And they *are* joined
because what is in one is in them all. How holy is the smallest grain of
sand when it is recognized as being part of the completed picture of
God's Son! The forms the broken pieces seem to take mean nothing. For
the whole is in each one. And every aspect of the Son of God is just the
same as every other part.

^46^ Join not your brother's dreams but join with *him*, and where you
join His Son, the Father is. Who seeks for substitutes when he perceives
he has lost nothing? Who would *want* to have the "benefits" of sickness
when he has received the simple happiness of health? What God has given
cannot *be* a loss, and what is not of Him has no effects. What then
would you perceive within the gap? The seeds of sickness come from the
belief that there is *joy* in separation, and its giving up would be a
*sacrifice*. But miracles are the result when you do not insist on
seeing in the gap what is not there. Your willingness to *let* illusions
go is all the Healer of God's Son requires. He will place the miracle of
healing where the seeds of sickness were. And there will be *no* loss,
but *only* gain.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Alternate to Dreams of Fear**](#part0004.html#level-239) {#part0033_split_005.html#h1-239 .level1a}

^47^ What is a sense of sickness but a sense of limitation? Of a
splitting *off* and separating *from*? A gap perceived between
yourselves and what is seen as health? The good is seen outside; the
evil, in. And thus is sickness separating off the self from good and
keeping evil in. God is the *alternate* to dreams of fear. Who shares in
them can *never* share in Him. But who withdraws his mind from sharing
them *is* sharing Him. There is no other choice. Except you share it,
nothing can exist. And *you* exist because God shared His Will with you,
that His creation might create.

^48^ It is the *sharing* of the evil dreams of hate and malice,
bitterness and death, of sin and suffering and pain and loss, that makes
them real. Unshared, they are perceived as meaningless. The fear is gone
from them because you did not give them your support. Where fear has
gone, there love *must* come because there *are* but these alternatives.
Where one appears, the other disappears. And which you share becomes the
only one you have. You have the one which you accept, because it is the
only one you *wish* to have. You share no evil dreams if you forgive the
dreamer and perceive that he is not the dream he made. And so he cannot
be a part of yours, from which you *both* are free. Forgiveness
separates the dreamer from the evil dream and thus releases him.

^49^ Remember if you share an evil dream, you will believe you *are* the
dream you share. And fearing it, you will not *want* to know your own
Identity because you think that *it* is fearful. And you *will* deny
your Self and walk upon an alien ground which your Creator did not make
and where you seem to be a "something" you are not. You *will* make war
upon your Self, which seems to be your enemy, and *will* attack your
brother as a part of what you hate. There *is* no compromise. You are
your Self or an illusion. What can be between illusion and the truth? A
middle ground where you can be a thing that is not you must be a dream
and cannot be the truth.

^50^ You have conceived a little gap between illusions and the truth to
be the place where all your safety lies and where your Self is safely
hidden by what you have made. Here is a world established that is sick,
and this the world the body's eyes perceive. Here are the sounds it
hears-the voices which its ears were made to hear. Yet sights and sounds
the body can perceive are meaningless. It cannot see nor hear. It does
not know what seeing *is*, what listening is *for*. It is as little able
to perceive as it can judge or understand or know. Its eyes are blind;
its ears are deaf. It cannot think, and so it cannot have effects.

^51^ What is there God created to be sick? And what that He created not
can be? Let not your eyes behold a dream, your ears bear witness to
illusion. They were made to look upon a world that is not there, to hear
the voices that can make no sound. Yet are there other sounds and other
sights which *can* be seen and heard and understood. For eyes and ears
are senses without sense, and what they see and hear they but report. It
is not they that hear and see, but *you*, who put together every jagged
piece, each senseless scrap and shred of evidence, and make a witness to
the world you want. Let not the body's ears and eyes perceive these
countless fragments seen within the gap which you imagined, and let them
persuade their maker his imaginings are real.

^52^ Creation proves reality because it shares the function all creation
shares. It is not made of little bits of glass, a piece of wood, a
thread or two perhaps, all put together to attest its truth. Reality
does not depend on this. There *is* no gap which separates the truth
from dreams and from illusions. Truth has left no room for them in any
place or time. For it fills every place and every time and makes them
wholly indivisible.

^53^ You who believe there *is* a little gap between you, do not
understand that it is here that you are kept as prisoners in a world
perceived to be existing here. The world you see does not exist because
the place where you perceive it is not real. The gap is carefully
concealed in fog, and misty pictures rise to cover it with vague,
uncertain forms and changing shapes, forever unsubstantial and unsure.
Yet in the gap is *nothing*. And there *are* no awesome secrets and no
darkened tombs where terror rises from the bones of death. Look at the
little gap, and you behold the innocence and emptiness of sin that you
will see within yourself when you have lost the fear of *recognizing*
love.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Secret Vows**](#part0004.html#level-240) {#part0033_split_006.html#h1-240 .level1a}

^54^ Who punishes the body is insane. For here the little gap is seen,
and yet it is not here. It has not judged itself nor made itself to be
what it is not. It does not seek to make of pain a joy and look for
lasting pleasure in the dust. It does not tell you what its purpose is
and cannot understand what it is for. It does not victimize because it
has no will, no preferences, and no doubts. It does not wonder what it
is. And so it has no need to be competitive. It *can* be victimized but
*cannot* feel itself as victim. It accepts no role but does what it is
told, without attack.

^55^ It is indeed a senseless point of view to hold responsible for
sight a thing that cannot see and blame it for the sounds you do not
like, although it cannot hear. It suffers not the punishment you give
because it has no feeling. It behaves in ways you want but never makes
the choice. It is not born and does not die. It can but follow aimlessly
the path on which it has been set. And if that path is changed, it walks
as easily another way. It takes no sides and judges not the road it
travels. It perceives no gap because it does not hate. It can be *used*
for hate, but it cannot be hateful made thereby.

^56^ The thing you hate and fear and loathe and *want,* the body does
not know. You send it forth to seek for separation and to be a separate
thing. And *then* you hate it, not for what it is, but for the uses you
have made of it. You shrink from what it sees and what it hears and hate
its frailty and littleness. And you despise its acts but not your own.
It sees and acts for *you*. It hears *your* voice. And it is frail and
little by *your* wish. It seems to punish you and thus deserve your
hatred for the limitations which it brings to you. Yet you have made of
it a symbol for the limitations which you want your *mind* to have and
see and *keep*.

^57^ The body *represents* the gap between the little bit of mind you
call your own and all the rest of what is *really* yours. You hate it,
yet you think it *is* your self and that without it would your self be
lost. This is the secret vow which you have made with every brother who
would walk apart. This is the secret oath you take again, whenever you
perceive yourself attacked. No one can suffer if he does not see himself
attacked and *losing* by attack. Unstated and unheard in consciousness
is every pledge to sickness. Yet it is a promise to another to be hurt
by him and to attack him in return.

^58^ Sickness is anger taken out upon the body, so that *it* will suffer
pain. It is the obvious effect of what was made in secret, in agreement
with another's secret wish to be apart from you, as you would be apart
from him. Unless you *both* agree that is your wish, it can have no
effects. Whoever says, "There *is* no gap between my mind and yours" has
kept God's promise, not his tiny oath to be forever faithful unto death.
And by his healing is his brother healed.

^59^ Let this be your agreement with each one-that you be one with him
and not apart. And he will keep the promise that you make with him
because it is the one which he has made to God, as God has made to him.
God keeps His promises; His Son keeps his. In his creation did his
Father say, "You are beloved of Me and I of you forever. Be you perfect
as Myself, for you can never be apart from Me." His Son remembers not
that he replied "I will," though in that promise he was born. Yet God
reminds him of it every time he does not share a promise to be sick but
lets his mind be healed and unified. His secret vows are powerless
before the Will of God, Whose promises he shares. And what he
substitutes is not his will, who has made promise of himself to God.
:::

[]{#part0033_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Beautiful Relationship**](#part0004.html#level-241) {#part0033_split_007.html#h1-241 .level1a}

^60^ God asks for nothing, and His Son, like Him, need ask for nothing.
For there is no lack in him. An empty space, a little gap, would be a
lack. And it is only there that he could want for something he has not.
A space where God is not, a gap between the Father and the Son is not
the Will of either, who have promised to be one. God's promise is a
promise to *Himself*, and there is no one who could be untrue to what He
wills as part of what He *is.* The promise that there is no gap between
Himself and what He is cannot be false. What will can come between what
*must* be one, and in Whose wholeness there can *be* no gap?

^61^ The beautiful relationship you have with all your brothers is a
part of you because it is a part of God Himself. Are you not sick if you
deny yourself your wholeness and your health, the Source of help, the
Call to healing, and the Call to heal? Your savior waits for healing,
and the world waits with him. Nor are you apart from it. For healing
will be one or not at all, its oneness being where the healing lies.
What could correct for separation but its opposite? There is no middle
ground in any aspect of salvation. You accept it wholly or accept it
not. What is unseparated must be joined. And what is joined cannot be
separate.

^62^ Either there is a gap between you and your brother, or you *are* as
one. There is no in between, no other choice, and no allegiance to be
split between the two. A split allegiance is but faithlessness to both
and merely sets you spinning round, to grasp uncertainly at any straw
that seems to hold some promise of relief. Yet who can build his home
upon a straw and count on it as shelter from the wind? The body can be
made a home like this because it lacks foundation in the truth. And yet,
*because* it does, it can be seen as *not* your home but merely as an
aid to help you reach the home where God abides.

^63^ With *this* as purpose *is* the body healed. It is not used to
witness to the dream of separation and disease. Nor is it idly blamed
for what it did not do. It serves to help the healing of God's Son, and
for *this* purpose it cannot *be* sick. It will not join a purpose not
your own, and you have *chosen* that it not be sick. All miracles are
based upon this choice and given you the instant it is made. No forms of
sickness are immune because the choice cannot be made in terms of form.
The choice of sickness *seems* to be a form, yet it is one, as is its
opposite. And *you* are sick or well accordingly.

^64^ But never you alone. This world is but the dream that you can *be*
alone and think without affecting those apart from you. To be alone must
mean you are apart, and if you are, you cannot *but* be sick. This seems
to prove that you must be apart. Yet all it means is that you tried to
keep a promise to be true to faithlessness. Yet faithlessness *is*
sickness. It is like the house set upon straw. It seems to be quite
solid and substantial in itself. Yet its stability cannot be judged
apart from its foundation. If it rests on straw, there is no need to bar
the door and lock the windows and make fast the bolts. The wind *will*
topple it, and rain *will* come and carry it into oblivion.

^65^ What is the sense in seeking to be safe in what was *made* for
danger and for fear? Why burden it with further locks and chains and
heavy anchors when its weakness lies not in itself but in the frailty of
the little gap of nothingness whereon it stands? What *can* be safe
which rests upon a shadow? Would you build your home upon what will
collapse beneath a feather's weight?

^66^ Your home is built upon your brother's health, upon his happiness,
his sinlessness, and everything his Father promised him. No secret
promise you have made instead has shaken the Foundation of his home. The
winds will blow upon it, and the rain will beat against it but with no
effect. The world will wash away, and yet this house will stand forever,
for its strength lies not within itself alone. It is an ark of safety,
resting on God's promise that His Son is safe forever in Himself. What
gap can interpose itself between the safety of this shelter and its
Source? From here the body can be seen as what it is and neither less
nor more in worth than the extent to which it can be used to liberate
God's Son unto his home. And with this holy purpose is it made a home of
holiness a little while because it shares your Father's Will with *you.*
:::

[]{#part0034_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 29**](#part0004.html#chap-29) {#part0034_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Awakening**](#part0004.html#chap-29) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-242) {#part0034_split_000.html#h1-242 .level1a1}

^29:1^ There is no time, no place, no state where God is absent. There
is nothing to be feared. There is no way in which a gap could be
conceived of in the wholeness that is His. The compromise the least and
littlest gap would represent in His eternal love is quite impossible.
For it would mean His love could harbor just a hint of hate; His
gentleness turn sometimes to attack; and His eternal patience sometimes
fail. All this do you believe, when you perceive a gap between your
brother and yourself. How could you trust Him, then? For He must be
deceptive in His Love. Be wary, then; let Him not come too close, and
leave a gap between you and His love through which you can escape if
there be need for you to flee.

^2^ Here is the fear of God most plainly seen. For love *is* treacherous
to those who fear, since fear and hate can never be apart. No one who
hates but is afraid of love and therefore *must* he be afraid of God.
Certain it is he knows not what love means. He fears to love and loves
to hate, and so he thinks that love is fearful-hate is love. This is the
consequence the little gap must bring to those who cherish it and think
that it is their salvation and their hope.

^3^ The fear of God! The greatest obstacle that peace must flow across
has not yet gone. The rest are past, but this one still remains to block
your path and make the way to light seem dark and fearful, perilous and
bleak. You had decided that your brother is your enemy. Sometimes a
friend, perhaps, provided that your separate interests made your
friendship possible a little while. But not without a gap between you,
lest he turn again into an enemy. \[Let him come close to you, and you
jumped back; as you approached, he instantly withdrew.\] A cautious
friendship, limited in scope and carefully restricted in amount, became
the treaty you had made with him. You shared a qualified entente in
which a clause of separation was a point on which you both agreed to
keep intact. And violating this was thought to be a breach of treaty not
to be allowed.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Closing of the Gap**](#part0004.html#level-243) {#part0034_split_001.html#h1-243 .level1a}

^4^ The gap between you is not one of space between two separate bodies.
This but seems to be dividing off your separate minds. It is the symbol
of a promise made to meet when you prefer and separate until you both
elect to meet again. And then your bodies seem to get in touch and
signify a meeting-place to join. But always is it possible to go your
separate ways. Conditional upon the "right" to separate will you agree
to meet from time to time and keep apart in intervals of separation,
which protect you from the "sacrifice" of love. The body *saves* you,
for it gets away from total sacrifice and gives you time in which to
build again your separate selves, which you believe diminish as you
meet.

^5^ The body *could* not separate your minds unless you wanted it to be
a cause of separation and of distance seen between you. Thus do you
endow it with a power that lies not within itself. And herein lies its
power over *you*. For now you think that it determines when you meet and
limits your ability to make communion with each other's mind. And now it
tells you where to go and how to go there, what is feasible for you to
undertake, and what you cannot do. It dictates what its health can
tolerate and what will tire it and make it sick. And its "inherent"
weaknesses set up the limitations on what you would do and keep your
purpose limited and weak.

^6^ The body *will* accommodate to this if you would have it so. It will
allow but limited indulgences in "love," with intervals of hatred in
between. And it will take command of when to "love" and when to shrink
more safely into fear. It will be sick because you do not know what
loving means. And so you *must* misuse each circumstance and everyone
you meet and see in them a purpose not your own.

^7^ It is not love that asks a sacrifice. But fear *demands* the
sacrifice of love, for in love's presence fear cannot abide. For hate to
be maintained love *must* be feared and only sometimes present,
sometimes gone. Thus is love seen as treacherous because it seems to
come and go uncertainly and offer no stability to you. You do not see
how limited and weak is your allegiance and how frequently you have
demanded that love go away and leave you quietly alone in "peace."

^8^ The body, innocent of any goal, is your excuse for variable goals
*you* hold and force the body to maintain. You do not fear its weakness,
but its lack of strength *or* weakness. Would you recognize that nothing
stands between you? Would you know there *is* no gap behind which you
can hide? There is a shock that comes to those who learn their savior is
their enemy no more. There is a wariness that is aroused by learning
that the body is not real. And there are overtones of seeming fear
around the happy message, "God is love."

^9^ Yet all that happens when the gap is gone is peace eternal. Nothing
more than that, and nothing less. Without the fear of God, what could
induce you to abandon Him? What toys or trinkets in the gap could serve
to hold you back an instant from His love? Would you allow the body to
say "no" to Heaven's calling, were you not afraid to find a loss of self
in finding God? Yet *can* your Self be lost by being found?
:::

[]{#part0034_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Coming of the Guest**](#part0004.html#level-244) {#part0034_split_002.html#h1-244 .level1a}

^10^ Why would you not perceive it as release from suffering to learn
that you are free? Why would you not acclaim the truth, instead of
looking on it as an enemy? Why does an easy path, so clearly marked it
is impossible to lose the way, seem thorny, rough, and far too difficult
for you to follow? Is it not because you see it as the road to hell
instead of looking on it as a simple way, without a sacrifice or any
loss, to find yourself in Heaven and in God? Until you realize you give
up nothing, until you understand there *is* no loss, you will have some
regrets about the way that you have chosen. And you will not see the
many gains your choice has offered you. Yet though you do not see them,
they are there. Their *cause* has been effected, and they must be
present where their cause has entered in.

^11^ You have accepted healing's Cause, and so it must be you are
healed. And being healed, the power to heal must also now be yours. The
miracle is not a separate thing which happens suddenly, as an effect
without a cause. Nor is it in itself a cause. But where its cause is
must it be. Now is it caused, though not as yet perceived. And its
effects are there, though not yet seen. Look inward now, and you will
not behold a reason for regret but cause indeed for glad rejoicing and
for hope of peace.

^12^ It *has* been hopeless to attempt to find the hope of peace upon a
battleground. It *has* been futile to demand escape from sin and pain of
what was made to serve the function of *retaining* sin and pain. For
pain and sin are one illusion, as are hate and fear, attack and guilt
but one. Where they are causeless, their effects are gone, and love must
come wherever they are not. Why are you not rejoicing? You are free of
pain and sickness, misery and loss, and all effects of hatred and
attack. No more is pain your friend and guilt your god, and you should
welcome the effects of love.

^13^ Your Guest *has* come. You asked Him, and He came. You did not hear
Him enter, for you did not wholly welcome Him. And yet His gifts came
with Him. He has laid them at your feet and asks you now that you will
look on them and take them for your own. He *needs* your help in giving
them to all who walk apart believing they are separate and alone. They
will be healed when you accept your gifts, because your Guest will
welcome everyone whose feet have touched the holy ground whereon you
stand and where His gifts for them are laid.

^14^ You do not see how much you now can give because of everything you
have received. Yet He Who entered in but waits for *you* to come where
you invited Him to be. There is no other place where He can find His
host nor where His host can meet with Him. And nowhere else His gifts of
peace and joy and all the happiness His Presence brings can be obtained.
For they are where He is Who brought them with Him that they might be
yours. You cannot see your Guest, but you *can* see the gifts He
brought. And when you look on them, you will believe His Presence must
be there. For what you now can do could not be done without the love and
grace His Presence holds.

^15^ Such is the promise of the living God-His Son have life and every
living thing be part of him, and nothing else have life. What *you* have
given "life" is not alive and symbolizes but your wish to be alive apart
from life, alive in death, with death perceived as life, and living,
death. Confusion follows on confusion here, for on confusion has this
world been based, and there is nothing else it rests upon. Its basis
does not change, although it seems to be in constant change. Yet what is
that except the state confusion really means? Stability to those who are
confused is meaningless, and shift and change become the law on which
they predicate their lives.

^16^ The body does not change. It represents the larger dream that
change is possible. To change is to attain a state unlike the one in
which you found yourself before. There *is* no change in immortality,
and Heaven knows it not. Yet here on earth it has a double purpose, for
it can be made to teach opposing things. And they reflect the teacher
who is teaching them. The body can *appear* to change with time, with
sickness or with health, and with events that seem to alter it. Yet this
but means the mind remains unchanged in its belief of what the purpose
of the body is.

^17^ Sickness is a demand the body be a thing that it is not. Its
nothingness is guarantee that it *can not* be sick. In your demand that
it be more than this lies the idea of sickness. For it asks that God be
less than all He really is. What, then, becomes of you, for it *is* you
of whom the sacrifice is asked? For He is told that part of Him belongs
to Him no longer. He must sacrifice your self, and in His sacrifice are
you made more, and He is lessened by the loss of you. And what is gone
from Him becomes your god, protecting you from being part of Him.

^18^ The body that is asked to be a god will be attacked because its
nothingness has not been recognized. And so it seems to be a thing with
power in itself. As something, it can be perceived and thought to feel
and act and hold you in its grasp as prisoner to itself. And it can fail
to be what you demanded that it be. And you will hate it for its
littleness, unmindful that the failure does not lie in that it is not
more than it should be but only in your failure to perceive that it is
nothing. Yet its nothingness is your salvation, from which you would
flee.

^19^ As "something" is the body asked to be God's enemy, replacing what
He is with littleness and limit and despair. It is His loss you
celebrate when you behold the body as a thing you love, or look upon it
as a thing you hate. For if He be the sum of everything, then what is
not in Him does not exist, and His completion *is* its nothingness. Your
savior is not dead, nor does he dwell in what was built as temple unto
death. He lives in God, and it is this that makes him savior unto you,
and *only* this. His body's nothingness releases yours from sickness and
from death. For what is yours cannot be more nor less than what is his.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. God's Witnesses**](#part0004.html#level-245) {#part0034_split_003.html#h1-245 .level1a}

^20^ Condemn your savior not because he thinks he is a body. For beyond
his dreams is his reality. But he must learn he is a savior first,
before he can remember what he is. And he must save who would be saved.
On saving you depends his happiness. For who is savior but the one who
*gives* salvation? Thus he learns it must be his to give. Unless he
gives, he will not know he has, for giving is the *proof* of having.
Only those who think that God is lessened by their strength could fail
to understand this must be so. For who *could* give unless he has, and
who could lose by giving what must be *increased* thereby?

^21^ Think you the Father lost Himself when He created you? Was He made
weak because He shared His love? Was He made incomplete by your
perfection? Or are you the *proof* that He is perfect and complete? Deny
Him not His witness in the dream His Son prefers to his reality. He must
be savior *from* the dream he made, that he be free of it. He must see
someone else as *not* a body, one with him, without the wall the world
has built to keep apart all living things who know not that they live.
Within the dream of bodies and of death is yet one theme of truth-no
more, perhaps, than just a tiny spark, a space of light created in the
dark, where God still shines.

^22^ You cannot wake yourself. Yet you can *let* yourself be wakened.
You can overlook your brother's dreams. So perfectly can you forgive him
his illusions, he becomes your savior from your dreams. And as you see
him shining in the space of light where God abides within the darkness,
you will see that God Himself is where his body is. Before this light
the body disappears, as heavy shadows must give way to light. The
darkness cannot choose that it remain. The coming of the light *means*
it is gone. In glory will you see your brother then and understand what
*really* fills the gap so long perceived as keeping you apart.

^23^ There, in its place, God's Witness has set forth the gentle way of
kindness to God's Son. Whom you forgive is given power to forgive you
your illusions. By your gift of freedom is it given unto you. Make way
for love, which you did not create, but which you *can* extend. On earth
this means forgive your brother, that the darkness may be lifted from
your mind. When light has come to him through your forgiveness, he will
not forget his savior, leaving him unsaved. For it was in *your* face he
saw the light that he would keep beside him as he walks through darkness
to the everlasting light.

^24^ How holy are you, that the Son of God can be your savior in the
midst of dreams of desolation and disaster. See how eagerly he comes and
steps aside from heavy shadows that have hidden him and shines on you in
gratitude and love. He is himself, but not himself alone. And as his
Father lost not part of Him in your creation, so the light in him is
brighter still because you gave your light to him to save him from the
dark. And now the light in you must be as bright as shines in him. This
is the spark that shines within the dream-that you can help him waken
and be sure his waking eyes will rest on you. And in his glad salvation,
*you* are saved.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Dream Roles**](#part0004.html#level-246) {#part0034_split_004.html#h1-246 .level1a}

^25^ Do you believe that truth can be but *some* illusions? They are
dreams *because* they are not true. Their equal lack of truth becomes
the basis for the miracle, which means that you have understood that
dreams are dreams and that escape depends not on the dream, but only on
awaking. Could it be some dreams are kept and others wakened from? The
choice is not between which dreams to keep, but only if you want to live
in dreams or to awaken from them. Thus it is the miracle does not select
some dreams to leave untouched by its beneficence. You cannot dream some
dreams and wake from some, for you are either sleeping or awake. And
dreaming goes with only one of these.

^26^ The dreams you think you like would hold you back as much as those
in which the fear is seen. For *every* dream is but a dream of fear, no
matter what the form it seems to take. The fear is seen within, without,
or both. Or it can be disguised in pleasant form. But never is it absent
from the dream, for fear is the material of dreams from which they all
are made. Their form can change, but they cannot be made of something
else. The miracle were treacherous indeed if it allowed you still to be
afraid because you did not *recognize* the fear. You would not then be
willing to awake, for which the miracle prepares the way.

^27^ In simplest form, it can be said attack is a response to function
unfulfilled as *you* perceive the function. It can be in you or someone
else, but where it is perceived it will be there, it is attacked.
Depression or assault must be the theme of every dream, for they are
made of fear. The thin disguise of pleasure and of joy in which they may
be wrapped but slightly veils the heavy lump of fear which is their
core. And it is *this* the miracle perceives, and not the wrappings in
which it is bound.

^28^ When you are angry, is it not because someone has failed to fill
the function *you* allotted him? And does not this become the "reason"
your attack is justified? The dreams you think you like are those in
which the functions you have given have been filled, the needs which you
ascribe to you are met. It does not matter if they be fulfilled or
merely wanted. It is the idea that they *exist* from which the fears
arise. Dreams are not wanted more or less. They are desired or not. And
each one represents some function which you have assigned, some goal
which an event, or body, or a thing *should* represent and *should*
achieve for you. If it succeeds, you think you like the dream. If it
should fail, you think the dream is sad. But whether it succeeds or
fails is not its core but just the flimsy covering.

^29^ How happy would your dreams become if you were *not* the one who
gave the "proper" role to every figure which the dream contains. No one
can fail but your *idea* of him, and there is no betrayal *but* of this.
The core of dreams the Holy Spirit gives is *never* one of fear. The
coverings may not appear to change, but what they mean *has* changed
because they cover something else. Perceptions are determined by their
purpose in that they seem to *be* what they are *for*. A shadow figure
who attacks becomes a brother giving you a chance to help if this
becomes the function of the dream. And dreams of sadness thus are turned
to joy.

^30^ What *is* your brother for? You do not know because *your* function
is obscure to you. Do not ascribe a role to him which you imagine would
bring happiness to you. And do not try to hurt him when he fails to take
the part which you assigned to him in what you dream your life was meant
to be. He asks for help in every dream he has, and you have help to give
him if you see the function of the dream as He perceives its function,
Who can utilize all dreams as means to serve the function given Him.
Because He loves the dreamer not the dream, each dream becomes an
offering of love. For at its center is His love for you, which lights
whatever form it takes with love.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Changeless Dwelling Place**](#part0004.html#level-247) {#part0034_split_005.html#h1-247 .level1a}

^31^ There is a place in you where this whole world has been forgotten,
where no memory of sin and of illusion lingers still. There is a place
in you which time has left, and echoes of eternity are heard. There is a
resting place so still no sound except a hymn to Heaven rises up to
gladden God the Father and the Son. Where both abide are They
remembered, both. And where They are is Heaven and is peace. Think not
that you can change Their dwelling place. For your Identity abides in
Them, and where They are, forever must *you* be.

^32^ The changelessness of Heaven is in you, so deep within that nothing
in this world but passes by, unnoticed and unseen. The still infinity of
endless peace surrounds you gently in its soft embrace, so strong and
quiet, tranquil in the might of its Creator; nothing can intrude upon
the sacred Son of God within. Here is the role the Holy Spirit gives to
you who wait upon the Son of God and would behold him waken and be glad.
He is a part of you, and you of him because he is his Father's Son and
not for any purpose you may see in him. Nothing is asked of you but to
accept the changeless and eternal that abide in him, for your Identity
is there. The peace in you can but be found in him. And every thought of
love you offer him but brings you nearer to your wakening to peace
eternal and to endless joy.

^33^ This sacred Son of God is like yourself-the mirror of his Father's
love for you, the soft reminder of his Father's love by which he was
created and which still abides in him, as it abides in you. Be very
still and hear God's Voice in him and let It tell you what his function
is. He was created that you might be whole, for only the complete can be
a part of God's completion, Which created you.

^34^ There is no gift the Father asks of you but that you see in all
creation but the shining glory of His gift to you. Behold His Son, His
perfect gift in whom his Father shines forever and to whom is all
creation given as his own. Because he has it is it given you, and where
it lies in him, behold your peace. The quiet that surrounds you dwells
in him, and from this quiet come the happy dreams in which your hands
are joined in innocence. These are not hands that grasp in dreams of
pain. They hold no sword, for they have left their hold on every vain
illusion of the world. And being empty, they received instead a
brother's hand in which completion lay.

^35^ If you but knew the glorious goal that lies beyond forgiveness, you
would not keep hold on any thought, however light the touch of evil on
it may appear to be. For you would understand how great the cost of
holding anything God did not give in minds that can direct the hand to
bless and lead God's Son unto his Father's house. Would you not *want*
to be a friend to him, created by his Father as His home? If God esteems
him worthy of Himself, would *you* attack him with the hands of hate?
Who would lay bloody hands on Heaven itself and hope to find its peace?
Your brother thinks he holds the hand of death. Believe him not. But
learn instead how blessed are you who can release him just by offering
him yours.

^36^ A dream is given you in which he is your savior, not your enemy in
hate. A dream is given you in which you have forgiven him for all his
dreams of death-a dream of hope you share with him instead of dreaming
evil separate dreams of hate. Why does it seem so hard to share this
dream? Because unless the Holy Spirit gives the dream its function, it
was made for hate and will continue in death's services. Each form it
takes in some way calls for death. And those who serve the lord of death
have come to worship in a separated world, each with his tiny spear and
rusted sword to keep his ancient promises to die.

^37^ Such is the core of fear in every dream that has been kept apart
from use by Him Who sees a different function for a dream. When dreams
are shared, they lose the function of attack and separation, even though
it was for this that every dream was made. Yet nothing in the world of
dreams remains without the hope of change and betterment, for here is
not where changelessness is found. Let us be glad indeed that this is so
and seek not the eternal in this world. Forgiving dreams are means to
step aside from dreaming of a world outside yourself. And leading
finally beyond all dreams unto the peace of everlasting life.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. Forgiveness and Peace**](#part0004.html#level-248) {#part0034_split_006.html#h1-248 .level1a}

^38^ How willing are you to forgive your brother? How much do you desire
peace instead of endless strife and misery and pain? These questions are
the same in different form. Forgiveness *is* your peace, for herein lies
the end of separation and the dream of danger and destruction, sin, and
death; of madness and of murder, grief and loss. This is the "sacrifice"
salvation asks and gladly offers peace instead of this.

^39^ Swear not to die, you holy Son of God! You make a bargain that you
cannot keep. The Son of Life cannot be killed. He is immortal as his
Father. What he is cannot be changed. He is the only thing in all the
universe that *must* be one. What seems eternal all will have an end.
The stars will disappear, and night and day will be no more. All things
that come and go, the tides, the seasons, and the lives of man; all
things that change with time and bloom and fade will not return. Where
time has set an end is not where the eternal is. God's Son can never
change by what man made of him. He will be as he was and as he is, for
time appointed not his destiny nor set the hour of his birth and death.
Forgiveness will not change him. Yet time waits upon forgiveness that
the things of time may disappear because they have no use.

^40^ Nothing survives its purpose. If it be conceived to die, then die
it must unless it does not take this purpose as its own. Change is the
only thing that can be made a blessing here, where purpose is not fixed,
however changeless it appears to be. Think not that you can set a goal
unlike God's purpose for you and establish it as changeless and eternal.
You can give yourself a purpose that you do not have. But you *can not*
remove the power to change your mind and see another purpose there.
Change is the greatest gift God gave to all that you would make eternal,
to ensure that only Heaven would not pass away.

^41^ You were not born to die. You cannot change, because your function
has been fixed by God. All other goals are set in time and change that
time might be preserved, excepting *one*. Forgiveness does not aim at
keeping time but at its ending when it has no use. Its purpose ended; it
is gone. And where it once held seeming sway is now restored the
function God established for His Son in full awareness. Time can set no
end to its fulfillment nor its changelessness. There is no death because
the living share the function their Creator gave to them. Life's
function cannot be to die. It must be life's extension, that it be as
one forever and forever without end.

^42^ This world will bind your feet and tie your hands and kill your
body only if you think that it was made to crucify God's Son. For even
though it was a dream of death, you need not let it stand for this to
you. Let *this* be changed, and nothing in the world but must be changed
as well. For nothing here but is defined as what you see it for. How
lovely is the world whose purpose is forgiveness of God's Son! How free
from fear, how filled with blessing and with happiness! And what a
joyous thing it is to dwell a little while in such a happy place! Nor
can it be forgot in such a world, it *is* a little while till
timelessness comes quietly to take the place of time.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The Lingering Illusion**](#part0004.html#level-249) {#part0034_split_007.html#h1-249 .level1a}

^43^ Seek not outside yourself. For it will fail, and you will weep each
time an idol falls. Heaven cannot be found where it is not, and there
can be no peace excepting there. Each idol that you worship when God
calls will never answer in His place. There *is* no other answer you can
substitute and find the happiness His answer brings. Seek not outside
yourself. For all your pain comes simply from a futile search for what
you want, insisting where it must be found. What if it is not there? Do
you prefer that you be right or happy? Be you glad that you are told
where happiness abides and seek no longer elsewhere. You *will* fail.
But it is given you to know the truth and not to seek for it outside
yourself.

^44^ No one who comes here but must still have hope, some lingering
illusion, or some dream that there is something outside of himself that
will bring happiness and peace to him. If everything is in him, this
cannot be so. And therefore by his coming, he denies the truth about
himself and seeks for something *more* than everything, as if a part of
it were separated off and found where all the rest of it is not. This is
the purpose he bestows upon the body-that it seek for what he lacks and
give him what would make himself complete. And thus he wanders aimlessly
about in search of something that he cannot find, believing that he is
what he is not.

^45^ The lingering illusion will impel him to seek out a thousand idols
and to seek beyond them for a thousand more. And each will fail him, all
excepting one; for he will die and does not understand the idol that he
seeks *is* but his death. Its form appears to be outside himself. Yet
does he seek to kill God's Son within and prove that he is victor over
him. This is the purpose every idol has, for this the role that is
assigned to it, and this the role that cannot *be* fulfilled.

^46^ Whenever you attempt to reach a goal in which the body's betterment
is cast as major beneficiary, you try to bring about your death. For you
believe that you can suffer lack, and lack *is* death. To sacrifice is
to give up and thus to be without and to have suffered loss. And by this
giving up is life renounced. Seek not outside yourself. The search
implies you are not whole within and fear to look upon your devastation
and prefer to seek outside yourself for what you are.

^47^ Idols must fall *because* they have no life, and what is lifeless
*is* a sign of death. You came to die, and what would you expect but to
*perceive* the signs of death you seek? No sadness and no suffering
proclaims a message other than an idol found that represents a parody of
life which in its lifelessness is really death, conceived as real and
given living form. Yet each must fail and crumble and decay because a
form of death cannot be life, and what is sacrificed cannot be whole.

^48^ All idols of this world were made to keep the truth within from
being known to you and to maintain allegiance to the dream that you must
find what is outside yourself to be complete and happy. It is vain to
worship idols in the hope of peace. God dwells within, and your
completion lies in Him. No idol takes His place. Look not to idols. Do
not seek outside yourself. Let us forget the purpose of the world the
past has given it. For otherwise, the future *will* be like the past and
but a series of depressing dreams in which all idols fail you one by
one, and you see death and disappointment everywhere.

^49^ To change all this and open up a road of hope and of release in
what appeared to be an endless circle of despair, you need but to decide
you do not *know* the purpose of the world. You give it goals it does
not have, and thus do you decide what it is for. You try to see in it a
place of idols found outside yourself, with power to make complete what
is within by splitting what you are between the two. You *choose* your
dreams, for they are what you wish, perceived as if it had been given
you. Your idols do what you would have them do and have the power you
ascribe to them. And you pursue them vainly in the dream because you
want their power as your own.

^50^ Yet where are dreams but in a mind asleep? And can a dream succeed
in making real the pictures it projects outside itself? Save time, my
brothers; learn what time is *for*. And speed the end of idols in a
world made sad and sick by seeing idols there. Your holy minds are
altars unto God, and where He is, no idols can abide. The fear of God is
but the fear of loss of idols. It is not the fear of loss of your
reality. But you have made of your reality an idol which you must
protect against the light of truth. And all the world becomes the means
by which this idol can be saved. Salvation thus appears to threaten life
and offer death.

^51^ It is not so. Salvation seeks to prove there *is* no death, and
*only* life exists. The sacrifice of death is *nothing* lost. An idol
*cannot* take the place of God. Let Him remind you of His love for you,
and do not seek to drown His Voice in chants of deep despair to idols of
yourself. Seek not outside your Father for your hope. For hope of
happiness is *not* despair.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. Christ and Anti-Christ**](#part0004.html#level-250) {#part0034_split_008.html#h1-250 .level1a}

^52^ What is an idol? Do you think you know? For idols are unrecognized
as such and never seen for what they really are. That is the only power
which they have. Their *purpose* is obscure, and they are feared and
worshipped both *because* you do not know what they are for and why they
have been made. An idol is an image of your brother which you would
value more than what he *is*. Idols are made that he may be replaced, no
matter what their form. And it is this which never is perceived and
recognized. Be it a body or a thing, a place, a situation or a
circumstance, an object owned or wanted, or a right demanded or
achieved, it is the same.

^53^ Let not their form deceive you. Idols are but substitutes for your
reality. In some way, you believe they will complete your little self
for safety in a world perceived as dangerous, with forces massed against
your confidence and peace of mind. They have the power to supply your
lacks and add the value which you do not have. No one believes in idols
who has not enslaved himself to littleness and loss. And thus must seek
beyond his little self for strength to raise his head and stand apart
from all the misery the world reflects. This is the penalty for looking
not within for certainty and quiet calm which liberates you from the
world and lets you stand apart in quiet and in peace.

^54^ An idol is a false impression or a false belief-some form of
anti-Christ which constitutes a gap between the Christ and what you see.
An idol is a wish made tangible and given form and thus perceived as
real and seen outside the mind. Yet it is still a thought and cannot
leave the mind that is its source. Nor is its form apart from the idea
it represents. All forms of anti-Christ oppose the Christ. And fall
before His face like a dark veil which seems to shut you off from Him,
alone in darkness. Yet the light is there. A cloud does not put out the
sun. No more a veil can banish what it seems to separate nor darken by
one whit the light itself.

^55^ This world of idols *is* a veil across the face of Christ because
its *purpose* is to separate your brother from yourself. A dark and
fearful purpose, yet a thought without the power to change one blade of
grass from something living to a sign of death. Its form is nowhere, for
its source abides within your mind where God abideth not. Where is this
place where what is everywhere has been excluded and been kept apart?
What hand could be held up to block God's way? Whose voice could make
demand He enter not? The "more-than-everything" is not a thing to make
you tremble and to quail in fear. Christ's enemy is nowhere. He can take
no form in which he *ever* will be real.

^56^ What is an idol? Nothing! It must be believed before it seems to
come to life and *given* power that it may be feared. Its life and power
are its believer's gift, and this is what the miracle restores to what
*has* life and power worthy of the gift of Heaven and eternal peace. The
miracle does not restore the truth, the light the veil between has not
put out. It merely lifts the veil and *lets* the truth shine
unencumbered, being what it is. It does not need belief to be itself,
for it *has been* created, so it *is*. An idol is *established* by
belief, and when it is withdrawn, the idol "dies."

^57^ This is the anti-Christ-the strange idea there is a power past
omnipotence, a place beyond the infinite, a time transcending the
eternal. Here the world of idols has been set by the idea this power and
place and time are given form and shape the world where the impossible
has happened. Here the deathless come to die, the all-encompassing to
suffer loss, the timeless to be made the slaves of time. Here does the
changeless change; the peace of God, forever given to all living things,
gives way to chaos. And the Son of God, as perfect, sinless and as
loving as his Father, come to hate a little while; to suffer pain, and
finally to die.

^58^ Where is an idol? Nowhere! Can there be a gap in what is infinite,
a place where time can interrupt eternity? A place of darkness set where
all is light, a dismal alcove separated off from what is endless, *has*
no place to be. An idol is beyond where God has set all things forever
and has left no room for anything to be *except* His Will. Nothing and
nowhere must an idol be while God is everything and everywhere.

^59^ What purpose has an idol, then? What is it *for*? This is the only
question which has many answers, each depending on the one of whom the
question has been asked. The world *believes* in idols. No one comes
unless he worshipped them and still attempts to seek for one that yet
might offer him a gift reality does not contain. Each worshipper of
idols harbors hope his special deities will give him more than other men
possess. It *must* be more. It does not really matter more of what-more
beauty, more intelligence, more wealth, or even more affliction and more
pain. But *more* of something is an idol *for*. And when one fails,
another takes its place with hope of finding more of something else. Be
not deceived by forms the "something" takes. An idol is a means for
getting *more*. And it is *this* that is against God's Will.

^60^ God has not many sons, but only One. Who can have more, and who be
given less? In Heaven would the Son of God but laugh if idols could
intrude upon his peace. It is for him the Holy Spirit speaks and tells
you idols *have* no purpose here. For more than Heaven can you never
have. If Heaven is within, why would you seek for idols which would make
of Heaven less, to give you more than God bestowed upon your brother and
on you as one with Him? God *gave* you all there is. And to be sure you
could not lose it, did He also give the same to every living thing as
well. And thus *is* every living thing a part of you, as of Himself. No
idol can establish you as *more* than God. But you will never be content
with being *less*.
:::

[]{#part0034_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**X. The Forgiving Dream**](#part0004.html#level-251) {#part0034_split_009.html#h1-251 .level1a}

^61^ The slave of idols is a *willing* slave. For willing he must be to
let himself bow down in worship to what has no life and seek for power
in the powerless. What happened to the holy Son of God that this could
be his wish-to let himself fall lower than the stones upon the ground
and look to idols that they raise him up? Hear then your story in the
dream you made, and ask yourself if it be not the truth that you believe
that it is *not* a dream. A dream of judgment came into the mind that
God created perfect as Himself. And in that dream was Heaven changed to
hell, and God made enemy unto His Son.

^62^ How can God's Son awaken from the dream? It is a dream of judgment.
So must he judge not, and he *will* waken. For the dream will seem to
last while he is part of it. Judge not, for he who judges *will* have
need of idols which will hold the judgment off from resting on himself.
Nor can he know the Self he has condemned. Judge not, because you make
yourself a part of evil dreams where idols are your "true" identity and
your salvation from the judgment laid in terror and in guilt upon
yourself.

^63^ All figures in the dream are idols made to save you from the dream.
Yet they are *part* of what they have been made to save you *from*. Thus
does an idol *keep* the dream alive and terrible, for who could wish for
one unless he were in terror and despair? And this the idol represents,
and so its worship *is* the worship of despair and terror and the dream
from which they come. Judgment is an injustice to God's Son, and it *is*
justice that who judges him will not escape the penalty he laid upon
himself within the dream he made. God knows of justice, not of penalty.
But in the dream of judgment, you attack and are condemned and wish to
be the slave of idols which are interposed between your judgment and the
penalty it brings.

^64^ There *can* be no salvation in the dream as you are dreaming it.
For idols must be part of it to save you from what you believe you have
accomplished and have done to make you sinful and put out the light
within you. Little children, it is there. You do but dream, and idols
are the toys you dream you play with. Who has need of toys but children?
They pretend they rule the world and give their toys the power to move
about and talk and think and feel and speak for *them*. Yet everything
their toys appear to do is in the minds of those who play with them. But
they are eager to forget that they made up the dream in which their toys
are real, nor recognize their wishes are their own.

^65^ Nightmares are childish dreams. The toys have turned against the
child who thought he made them real. Yet *can* a dream attack? Or *can*
a toy grow large and dangerous and fierce and wild? This does the child
believe because he fears his thoughts and gives them to the toys
instead. And their reality becomes his own because they seem to *save*
him from his thoughts. Yet do they keep his thoughts alive and real but
seen outside himself, where they can turn against him for his treachery
to them. He thinks he *needs* them that he may escape his thoughts,
because he thinks the thoughts are real. And so he makes of anything a
toy to make his world remain outside himself, and play that *he* is but
a part of *it.*

^66^ There is a time when childhood should be passed and gone forever.
Seek not to retain the toys of children. Put them all away, for you have
need of them no more. The dream of judgment is a children's game in
which the child becomes the father, powerful, but with the little wisdom
of a child. What hurts him is destroyed; what helps him, blessed. Except
he judges this as does a child, who does not know what hurts and what
will heal. And bad things seem to happen, and he is afraid of all the
chaos in a world he thinks is governed by the laws he made. Yet is the
real world unaffected by the world he thinks is real. Nor have its laws
been changed because he did not understand.

^67^ The real world still is but a dream. Except the figures have been
changed. They are not seen as idols which betray. It is a dream in which
no one is used to substitute for something else nor interposed between
the thoughts the mind conceives and what it sees. No one is used for
something he is not, for childish things have all been put away. And
what was once a dream of judgment now has changed into a dream where all
is joy because that is the *purpose* which it has. Only forgiving dreams
can enter here, for time is almost over. And the forms which enter in
the dream are now perceived as brothers, not in judgment but in love.

^68^ Forgiving dreams have little need to last. They are not made to
separate the mind from what it thinks. They do not seek to prove the
dream is being dreamed by someone else. And in these dreams a melody is
heard which everyone remembers, though he has not heard it since before
all time began. Forgiveness, once complete, brings timelessness so close
the song of Heaven can be heard, not with the ears, but with the
holiness which never left the altar which abides forever deep within the
Son of God. And when he hears this song again, he knows he never heard
it not. And where is time, when dreams of judgment have been put away?

^69^ Whenever you feel fear in any form-and you *are* fearful if you do
not feel a deep content, a certainty of help, a calm assurance Heaven
goes with you-be sure you made an idol and believe it will betray you.
For beneath your hope that it will save you lie the guilt and pain of
self-betrayal and uncertainty, so deep and bitter that the dream cannot
conceal completely all your sense of doom. Your self-betrayal *must*
result in fear, for fear *is* judgment, leading surely to the frantic
search for idols and for death.

^70^ Forgiving dreams remind you that you live in safety and have not
attacked yourself. So do your childish terrors melt away and dreams
become a sign that you have made a new beginning, not another try to
worship idols and to *keep* attack. Forgiving dreams are kind to
everyone who figures in the dream. And so they bring the dreamer full
release from dreams of fear. He does not fear his judgment, for he has
judged no one, nor has sought to be released through judgment from what
judgment must impose. And all the while he is remembering what he forgot
when judgment seemed to be the way to *save* him from its penalty.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 30**](#part0004.html#chap-30) {#part0035_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The New Beginning**](#part0004.html#chap-30) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-252) {#part0035_split_000.html#h1-252 .level1a1}

^30:1^ The new beginning now becomes the focus of the curriculum. The
goal is clear, but now you need specific methods for attaining it. The
speed by which it can be reached depends on this one thing alone-your
willingness to practice every step. Each one will help a little every
time it is attempted. And together will these steps lead you from dreams
of judgment to forgiving dreams and out of pain and fear. They are not
new to you, but they are more ideas than rules of thought to you as yet.
So now we need to practice them awhile, until they are the rules by
which you live. We seek to make them habits now, so you will have them
ready for whatever need.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. Rules for Decision**](#part0004.html#level-253) {#part0035_split_001.html#h1-253 .level1a}

^2^ Decisions are continuous. You do not always know when you are making
them. But with a little practice with the ones you recognize, a set
begins to form which sees you through the rest. It is not wise to let
yourself become preoccupied with every step you take. The proper set,
adopted consciously each time you wake, will put you well ahead. And if
you find resistance strong and dedication weak, you are not ready. *Do
not fight yourself*. But think about the kind of day you want and tell
yourself there *is* a way in which this very day can happen just like
that. Then try again to have the day you want.

1\. ^3^ The outlook starts with this:

^4^ Today I will make no decision by myself.

^5^ This means that you are choosing not to be the judge of what to do.
But it must also mean you will not judge the situations where you will
be called upon to make response. For if you judge them, you have set the
rules for how you should react to them. And then another answer cannot
but produce confusion and uncertainty and fear.

^6^ This is your major problem now. You still make up your mind and
*then* decide to ask what you should do. And what you hear may not
resolve the problem as *you* saw it first. This leads to fear because it
contradicts what you perceive, and so you feel attacked. And therefore
angry. There are rules by which this will not happen. But it does occur
at first, while you are learning how to hear.

2\. ^7^ Throughout the day, at any time you think of it and have a quiet
moment for reflection, tell yourself again the kind of day you want, the
feelings you would have, the things you want to happen to you, and the
things you would experience and say,

^8^ If I make no decision by myself,\
This is the kind of day that will be given me.

^9^ These two procedures, practiced well, will serve to let you be
directed without fear, for opposition will not first arise and then
become a problem in itself.

^10^ But there will still be times when you have judged already. Now the
answer will provoke attack unless you quickly straighten out your mind
to want an answer that will work. Be certain this has happened if you
feel yourself unwilling to sit by and ask to have the answer given you.
This means you *have* decided by yourself and cannot see the *question*.
Now you need a quick restorative before you ask.

3\. ^11^ Remember once again the day you want and recognize that
something has occurred which is not part of it. Then realize that you
have asked a question by yourself and must have set an answer in your
terms. Then say,

^12^ I have no question. I forgot what to decide.

^13^ This cancels out the terms which you have set and lets the answer
show you what the question must have really been.

^14^ Try to observe this rule without delay despite your opposition. For
you have *already* gotten angry, and your fear of being answered in a
different way from what your version of the question asks will gain
momentum until you believe the day you want is one in which you get
*your* answer to *your* question. And you will not get it, for it would
destroy the day by robbing you of what you *really* want. This can be
very hard to realize when once you have decided by yourself the rules
which promise you a happy day. Yet this decision still can be undone by
simple methods which you can accept.

4\. ^15^ If you are so unwilling to receive you cannot even let your
question go, you can begin to change your mind with this:

^16^ At least I can decide I do not like what I feel now.

^17^ This much is obvious and paves the way for the next easy step.

5\. ^18^ Having decided that you do not like the way you feel, what
could be easier than to continue with,

^19^ And so I hope I have been wrong.

^20^ This works against the sense of opposition and reminds you that
help is not being thrust upon you but is something that you want and
that you need, because you do not like the way you feel. This tiny
opening will be enough to let you go ahead with just a few more steps
you need to let yourself be helped.

^21^ Now you have reached the turning point, because it has occurred to
you that *you* will gain if what you have decided is not so. Until this
point is reached, you will believe your happiness depends on being
*right*. But this much reason have you now attained-you would be better
off if you were *wrong*.

6\. ^22^ This tiny gain of wisdom will suffice to take you further. You
are not coerced but merely hope to get a thing you want. And you can say
in perfect honesty,

^23^ I want another way to look at this.

^24^ Now you have changed your mind about the day and have remembered
what you *really* want. Its purpose has no longer been obscured by the
insane belief you want it for the goal of being right when you are
wrong. Thus is the readiness for asking brought to your awareness, for
you cannot be in conflict when you ask for what you want and see that it
*is* this for which you ask.

7\. ^25^ This final step is but acknowledgment of lack of opposition to
be helped. It is a statement of an open mind, not certain yet, but
willing to be shown:

^26^ Perhaps there is another way to look at this.\
What can I lose by asking?

^27^ Thus you now can ask a question that makes sense, and so the answer
will make sense as well. Nor will you fight against it, for you see that
it is *you* who will be helped by it.

^28^ It must be clear that it is easier to have a happy day if you
prevent unhappiness from entering at all. But this takes practice in the
rules which will protect you from the ravages of fear. When this has
been achieved, the sorry dream of judgment has forever been undone. But
meanwhile, you have need for practicing the rules for its undoing. Let
us, then, consider once again the very first of the decisions which are
offered here.

^29^ We said you can begin a happy day with the determination not to
make decisions by yourself. This seems to be a real decision in itself.
And yet, you *cannot* make decisions by yourself. The only question
really is with *what* you choose to make them. That is really all. The
first rule, then, is not coercion but a simple statement of a simple
fact. You will not make decisions by yourself *whatever* you decide. For
they are made with idols or with God. And you ask help of Christ or
anti-Christ, and which you choose will join with you and tell you what
to do.

^30^ Your day is not at random. It is set by what you choose to live it
with and how the friend whose counsel you have sought perceives your
happiness. You always ask advice before you can decide on anything. Let
*this* be understood, and you can see there cannot be coercion here nor
grounds for opposition that you may be free. There *is* no freedom from
what must occur. And if you think there is, you must be wrong.

^31^ The second rule as well is but a fact. For you and your advisor
must agree on what you want before it can occur. It is but this
*agreement* which permits all things to happen. Nothing can be caused
without some form of union, be it with a dream of judgment or the Voice
for God. Decisions cause results *because* they are not made in
isolation. They are made by you and your advisor for yourself and for
the world as well. The day you want you offer to the world, for it will
be what you have asked for and will reinforce the rules of your advisor
in the world. Whose kingdom is the world for you today? What kind of day
will you decide to have?

^32^ It needs but two who would have happiness this day to promise it to
all the world. It needs but two to understand that they cannot decide
alone to guarantee the joy they asked for will be wholly shared. For
they have understood the basic law that makes decision powerful and
gives it all effects that it will ever have. It needs but two. These two
are joined before there *can* be a decision. Let this be the one
reminder that you keep in mind, and you will have the day you want and
give it to the world by having it yourself. Your judgment has been
lifted from the world by your decision for a happy day. And as you have
received, so must you give.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. Freedom of Will**](#part0004.html#level-254) {#part0035_split_002.html#h1-254 .level1a}

^33^ Do you not understand that to oppose the Holy Spirit is to fight
*yourself*? He tells you but *your* will; He speaks for *you.* In His
divinity is but your own. And all He knows is but your knowledge, saved
for you that you may do your will through Him. God *asks* you do your
will. He joins with *you*. He did not set His Kingdom up alone. And
Heaven itself but represents your will, where everything created is for
you. No spark of life but was created with your glad consent, as you
would have it be. And not one Thought that God has ever had but waited
for your blessing to be born. God is no enemy to you. He asks no more
than that He hear you call Him "Friend."

^34^ How wonderful it is to do your will! For that is freedom. There is
nothing else that ever should be called by freedom's name. Unless you do
your will, you are not free. And would God leave His Son without what he
has chosen for himself? God but ensured that you would never lose your
will when He gave you His perfect answer. Hear it now that you may be
reminded of His love and learn your will. God would not have His Son
made prisoner to what he does not want. He *joins* with you in willing
you be free. And to oppose Him is to make a choice against *yourself*
and choose that *you* be bound.

^35^ Look once again upon your enemy, the one you chose to hate instead
of love. For thus was hatred born into the world, and thus the rule of
fear established there. Now hear God speak to you through Him Who is His
Voice and yours as well, reminding you that it is not your will to hate
and be a prisoner to fear, a slave to death, a little creature with a
little life. Your will is boundless; it is not your will that it be
bound. What lies in you has joined with God Himself in all creation's
birth. Remember He Who has created you and through your will created
everything. Not one created thing but gives you thanks, for it is by
your will that it was born. No light of Heaven shines except for you,
for it was set in Heaven by your will.

^36^ What cause have you for anger in a world which merely waits your
blessing to be free? If you be prisoner, then God Himself could not be
free. For what is done to him whom God so loves is done to God Himself.
Think not He wills to bind you, Who has made you co-creator of the
universe along with Him. He would but keep your will forever and forever
limitless.

^37^ This world awaits the freedom you will give when you have
recognized that *you* are free. But you will not forgive the world until
you have forgiven Him Who gave your will to you. For it is *by* your
will the world is given freedom. Nor can you be free apart from Him
Whose holy Will you share. God turns to you to ask the world be saved,
for by your own salvation it is healed. And no one walks upon the earth
but must depend on your decision, that he learn death has no power over
him because he shares your freedom as he shares your will. It *is* your
will to heal him, and because you have decided *with* him, he is healed.
And now is God forgiven, for you chose to look upon your brother as a
friend.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. Beyond All Idols**](#part0004.html#level-255) {#part0035_split_003.html#h1-255 .level1a}

^38^ Idols are quite specific. But your will is universal, being
limitless. And so it has no form nor is content for its expression in
the terms of form. Idols are limits. They are the belief that there are
forms which will bring happiness and that, *by* limiting, is all
attained. It is as if you said, "I have no need of everything. This
little thing I want, and it will be as everything to me." And this must
fail to satisfy because it *is* your will that everything be yours.
Decide for idols, and you ask for loss. Decide for truth, and everything
*is* yours.

^39^ It is not form you seek. What form can be a substitute for God the
Father's love? What form can take the place of all the love in the
divinity of God the Son? What idol can make two of what is one? And
*can* the limitless be limited? You do not *want* an idol. It is not
your will to have one. It will not bestow on you the gift you seek. When
you decide upon the form of what you want, you lose the understanding of
its purpose. So you see your will within the idol, thus reducing it to a
specific form. Yet this could never *be* your will because what shares
in all creation cannot be content with small ideas and little things.

^40^ Behind the search for every idol lies the yearning for completion.
Wholeness has no form because it is unlimited. To seek a special person
or a thing to add to you to make yourself complete can only mean that
you believe some form is missing. And by finding this, you will achieve
completion in a form you like. This is the *purpose* of an idol-that you
will not look beyond it to the source of the belief that you *are*
incomplete. *Only* if you had sinned could this be so. For sin is the
idea you are alone and separated off from what is whole. And thus it
would be necessary for the search for wholeness to be made *beyond* the
boundaries of limits on yourself.

^41^ It never is the *idol* that you want. But what you think it offers
you, you want indeed and have the *right* to ask for. Nor could it be
possible it be denied. Your will to be complete is but God's will, and
this is *given* you by being His. God knows not form. He cannot answer
you in terms which have no meaning. And your will could not be satisfied
with empty forms made but to fill a gap which is not there. It is not
this you *want.* Creation gives no separate person and no separate thing
the power to complete the Son of God. What idol can be called upon to
give the Son of God what he already has?

^42^ Completion is the *function* of God's Son. He has no need to seek
for it at all. Beyond all idols stands his holy will to be but what he
is. For more than whole is meaningless. If there were change in him, if
he could be reduced to any form and limited to what is not in him, he
would not be as God created him. What idol can he need to be himself?
For can he give a part of him away? What is not whole cannot make whole.
But what is really asked for cannot *be* denied. Your will *is* granted.
Not in any form that would content you not, but in the whole completely
lovely Thought God holds of you.

^43^ Nothing that God knows not exists. And what He knows exists
forever, changelessly. For thoughts endure as long as does the mind that
thought of them. And in the Mind of God there is no ending nor a time in
which His Thoughts were absent or could suffer change. Thoughts are not
born and cannot die. They share the attributes of their creator, nor
have they a separate life apart from his. The thoughts you think are in
your mind, as you are in the Mind Which thought of you. And so there are
no separate parts in what exists within God's Mind. It is forever one,
eternally united and at peace.

^44^ Thoughts seem to come and go. Yet all this means is that you are
sometimes aware of them and sometimes not. An unremembered thought is
born again to you when it returns to your awareness. Yet it did not die
when you forgot it. It was always there, but you were unaware of it. The
Thought God holds of you is perfectly unchanged by your forgetting. It
will always be exactly as it was before the time when you forgot and
will be just the same when you remember. And it is the same within the
interval when you forgot.

^45^ The Thoughts of God are far beyond all change and shine forever.
They await not birth. They wait for welcome and remembering. The Thought
God holds of you is like a star, unchangeable in an eternal sky. So high
in Heaven it is set that those outside of Heaven know not it is there.
Yet still and white and lovely will it shine through all eternity. There
was no time it was not there; no instant when its light grew dimmer or
less perfect ever was.

^46^ Who knows the Father knows this light, for He is the eternal sky
which holds it safe, forever lifted up, and anchored sure. Its perfect
purity does not depend on whether it is seen on earth or not. The sky
embraces it and softly holds it in its perfect place, which is as far
from earth as earth from Heaven. It is not the distance nor the time
which keeps this star invisible to earth. But those who seek for idols
cannot know this star is there.

^47^ Beyond all idols is the Thought God holds of you. Completely
unaffected by the turmoil and the terror of the world, the dreams of
birth and death that here are dreamed, the myriad of forms that fear can
take; quite undisturbed, the Thought God holds of you remains exactly as
it always was. Surrounded by a stillness so complete no sound of battle
comes remotely near, it rests in certainty and perfect peace. Here is
your one reality kept safe, completely unaware of all the world that
worships idols and that knows not God. In perfect sureness of its
changelessness and of its rest in its eternal home, the Thought God
holds of you has never left the Mind of its Creator Whom it knows, as
its Creator knows that it is there.

^48^ Where could the Thought God holds of you exist but where *you* are?
Is your reality a thing apart from you and in a world which your reality
knows nothing of? Outside you there is no eternal sky, no changeless
star, and no reality. The Mind of Heaven's Son in Heaven is, for there
the Mind of Father and Son joined in creation which can have no end. You
can have not two realities, but one. Nor can you be *aware* of more than
one. An idol *or* the Thought God holds of you is your reality. Forget
not, then, that idols must keep hidden what you are, not from the Mind
of God, but from your own. The star shines still; the sky has never
changed. But you, the holy Son of God Himself, are unaware of your
reality.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. The Truth Behind Illusions**](#part0004.html#level-256) {#part0035_split_004.html#h1-256 .level1a}

^49^ You *will* attack what does not satisfy, and thus you will not see
you made it up. You *always* fight illusions. For the truth behind them
is so lovely and so still in loving gentleness, were you aware of it you
would forget defensiveness entirely and rush to its embrace. The truth
could never be attacked. And this you knew when you made idols. They
were made that this might be forgotten. You attack but false ideas and
never truthful ones. All idols are the false ideas you made to fill the
gap you think arose between yourself and what is true. And you attack
them for the things you think they represent. What lies beyond them
cannot *be* attacked.

^50^ The wearying, dissatisfying gods you made are blown-up children's
toys. A child is frightened when a wooden head springs up as a closed
box is opened suddenly or when a soft and silent wooly bear begins to
squeak as he takes hold of it. The rules he made for boxes and for bears
have failed him and have broken his "control" of what surrounds him. And
he is afraid because he thought the rules protected him. Now must he
learn the boxes and the bears did not deceive him, broke no rules, nor
mean his world is made chaotic and unsafe. *He* was mistaken. He
misunderstood what made him safe and thought that it had left.

^51^ The gap that is not there is filled with toys in countless forms.
And each one seems to break the rules you set for it. It never *was* the
thing you thought. It must appear to break your rules for safety, since
the rules were wrong. But *you* are not endangered. You can laugh at
popping heads and squeaking toys, as does the child who learns they are
no threat to him. Yet while he likes to play with them, he still
perceives them as obeying rules he made for his enjoyment. So there
still are rules which they can seem to break and frighten him. Yet *is*
he at the mercy of his toys? And *can* they represent a threat to him?

^52^ Reality observes the laws of God, and not the rules you set. It is
His laws which guarantee your safety. All illusions that you believe
about yourself obey *no* laws. They seem to dance a little while,
according to the rules you set for them. But then they fall and cannot
rise again. They are but toys, my children. Do not grieve for them.
Their dancing never brought you joy. But neither were they things to
frighten you nor make you safe if they obeyed your rules. They must be
neither cherished nor attacked but merely looked upon as children's toys
without a single meaning of their own. See one in them, and you will see
them all. See none in them, and they will touch you not.

^53^ Appearances deceive *because* they are appearances and not reality.
Dwell not on them in any form. They but obscure reality, and they bring
fear *because* they hide the truth. Do not attack what you have made to
*let* you be deceived, for thus you prove that you *have* been deceived.
Attack *has* power to make illusions real. Yet what it makes is nothing.
Who could be made fearful by a power that can have no real effects at
all? What could it be but an illusion, making things appear like to
itself? Look calmly at its toys and understand that they are idols which
but dance to vain desires. Give them not your worship, for they are not
there. Yet this is equally forgotten in attack. God's Son needs no
defense against his dreams. His idols do not threaten him at all. His
one mistake is that he thinks them real. What can the power of illusions
*do*?

^54^ Appearances can but deceive the mind that *wants* to be deceived.
And you can make a simple choice that will forever place you far beyond
deception. You need not concern yourself with how this will be done, for
this you cannot understand. But you *will* understand that mighty
changes have been quickly brought about when you decide one very simple
thing-you do not *want* whatever you believe an idol gives. For thus the
Son of God declares that he is free of idols. And thus *is* he free.

^55^ Salvation is a paradox indeed! What could it be except a happy
dream? It asks you but that you forgive all things that no one ever did,
to overlook what is not there, and not to look upon the unreal as
reality. You are but asked to let your will be done and seek no longer
for the things you do not want. And you are asked to let yourself be
free of all the dreams of what you never were and seek no more to
substitute the strength of idle wishes for the Will of God.

^56^ Here does the dream of separation start to fade and disappear. For
here the gap that is not there begins to be perceived without the toys
of terror that you made. No more than this is asked. Be glad indeed
salvation asks so little, not so much. It asks for *nothing* in reality.
And even in illusions it but asks forgiveness be the substitute for
fear. Such is the only rule for happy dreams. The gap is emptied of the
toys of fear, and then its unreality is plain. Dreams are for *nothing*.
And the Son of God can have no need of them. They offer him no single
thing that he could ever want. He is delivered from illusions by his
will and but restored to what he is. What could God's plan for his
salvation be, except a means to give him to Himself?
:::

[]{#part0035_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. The Only Purpose**](#part0004.html#level-257) {#part0035_split_005.html#h1-257 .level1a}

^57^ The real world is the state of mind in which the only purpose of
the world is seen to be forgiveness. Fear is not its goal, and the
*escape* from guilt becomes its aim. The value of forgiveness is
perceived and takes the place of idols which are sought no longer, for
their "gifts" are not held dear. No rules are idly set, and no demands
are made of anyone or anything to twist and fit into the dream of fear.
Instead, there is a wish to understand all things created as they really
are. And it is recognized that all things must be first forgiven, and
*then* understood.

^58^ Here, it is thought that understanding is *acquired* by attack.
There, it is clear that by attack is understanding *lost*. The folly of
pursuing guilt as goal is fully recognized. And idols are not wanted
there, for guilt is understood as the sole cause of pain in any form. No
one is tempted by its vain appeal, for suffering and death have been
perceived as things not wanted and not striven for. The possibility of
freedom has been grasped and welcomed, and the means by which it can be
gained can now be understood. The world becomes a place of hope because
its only purpose is to be a place where hope of happiness can be
fulfilled. And no one stands outside this hope because the world has
been united in belief the purpose of the world is one which all must
share if hope be more than just a dream.

^59^ Not yet is Heaven quite remembered, for the purpose of forgiveness
still remains. Yet everyone is certain he will go beyond forgiveness,
and he but remains until it is made perfect in himself. He has no wish
for anything but this. And fear has dropped away because he is united in
his purpose with himself. There is a hope of happiness in him so sure
and constant he can barely stay and wait a little longer with his feet
still touching earth. Yet is he glad to wait till every hand is joined
and every heart made ready to arise and go with him. For thus is *he*
made ready for the step in which is all forgiveness left behind.

^60^ The final step is God's because it is but God Who could create a
perfect Son and share His Fatherhood with him. No one outside of Heaven
knows how this can be, for understanding this is Heaven itself. Even the
real world has a purpose still beneath creation and eternity. But fear
is gone because its purpose is forgiveness, not idolatry. And so is
Heaven's Son prepared to be himself, and to remember that the Son of God
knows everything his Father understands and understands it perfectly
with Him.

^61^ The real world still falls short of this, for this is God's own
purpose-only His, and yet completely shared and perfectly fulfilled. The
real world is a state in which the mind has learned how easily do idols
go when they are still perceived, but wanted not. How willingly the mind
can let them go when it has understood that idols are nothing and
nowhere and are purposeless. For only then can guilt and sin be seen
without a purpose and as meaningless.

^62^ Thus is the real world's purpose gently brought into awareness, to
replace the goal of sin and guilt. And all that stood between your image
of yourself and what you are, forgiveness washes joyfully away. Yet God
need not create His Son again that what is his be given back to him. The
gap between your brother and yourself was never *there*. And what the
Son of God knew in creation, he must know again.

^63^ When brothers join in purpose in the world of fear, they stand
already at the edge of the real world. Perhaps they still look back and
think they see an idol that they want. Yet has their path been surely
set away from idols toward reality. For when they joined their hands, it
was Christ's hand they took, and they will look on Him Whose hand they
hold. The face of Christ is looked upon before the Father is remembered.
For He must be unremembered till His Son has reached beyond forgiveness
to the love of God. Yet is the love of Christ accepted first. And then
will come the knowledge They are One.

^64^ How light and easy is the step across the narrow boundaries of the
world of fear when you have recognized Whose hand you hold! Within your
hand is everything you need to walk with perfect confidence away from
fear forever and to go straight on and quickly reach the gate of Heaven
itself. For He Whose hand you hold was waiting but for you to join Him.
Now that you have come, would *He* delay in showing you the way that He
must walk with you? His blessing lies on you as surely as His Father's
love rests upon Him. His gratitude to you is past your understanding,
for you have enabled Him to rise from chains and go with you together to
His Father's house.

^65^ An ancient hate is passing from the world. And with it goes all
hatred and all fear. Look back no longer, for what lies ahead is all you
ever wanted in your hearts. Give up the world! But not to sacrifice. You
never *wanted* it. What happiness have you sought here that did not
bring you pain? What moment of content has not been bought at fearful
price in coins of suffering? Joy *has* no cost. It is your sacred right,
and what you pay for is not happiness. Be speeded on your way by
honesty, and let not your experiences here deceive in retrospect. They
were not free from bitter cost and joyless consequence.

^66^ Do not look back except in honesty. And when an idol tempts you,
think of this:

^67^ There never was a time an idol brought\
You anything except the "gift" of guilt.\
Not one was bought except at cost of pain,\
Nor was it ever paid by you alone.

^68^ Be merciful unto your brother, then. And do not choose an idol
thoughtlessly, remembering that he will pay the cost as well as you. For
he will be delayed when you look back, and you will not perceive Whose
loving hand you hold. Look forward, then, and walk in confidence with
happy hearts that beat in hope and do not pound in fear.

^69^ The Will of God forever lies in those whose hands are joined. Until
they joined, they thought He was their enemy. But when they joined and
shared a purpose, they were free to learn their will is one. And thus
the Will of God must reach to their awareness. Nor can they forget for
long that it is but their own.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Justification for Forgiveness**](#part0004.html#level-258) {#part0035_split_006.html#h1-258 .level1a}

^70^ Anger is *never* justified. Attack has *no* foundation. It is here
escape from fear begins and will be made complete. Here is the real
world given in exchange for dreams of terror. For it is on this
forgiveness rests and is but natural. You are not asked to offer pardon
where attack is due and would be justified. For this would mean that you
forgive a sin by overlooking what is really there. This is not pardon.
For it would assume that, by responding in a way which is not justified,
your pardon will become the answer to attack that has been made. And
thus is pardon inappropriate, by being granted where is it not due.

^71^ Pardon is *always* justified. It has a *sure* foundation. You do
not forgive the unforgivable nor overlook a real attack that calls for
punishment. Salvation does not lie in being asked to make unnatural
responses which are inappropriate to what is real. Instead, it merely
asks that you respond appropriately to what is not real by not
perceiving what has not occurred. If pardon were unjustified, you would
be asked to sacrifice your rights when you return forgiveness for
attack. But you are merely asked to see forgiveness as the natural
reaction to distress which rests on error and thus calls for help.
Forgiveness is the *only* sane response. It *keeps* your rights from
being sacrificed.

^72^ This understanding is the only change that lets the real world rise
to take the place of dreams of terror. Fear cannot arise unless attack
is justified, and if it had a real foundation, pardon would have none.
The real world is achieved when you perceive the basis of forgiveness is
quite real and fully justified. While you regard it as a gift
unwarranted, it must *uphold* the guilt you would "forgive." Unjustified
forgiveness *is* attack. And this is all the world can ever give. It
pardons "sinners" sometimes but remains aware that they have sinned. And
so they do not merit the forgiveness that it gives.

^73^ This is the false forgiveness, which the world employs to *keep*
the sense of sin alive. And recognizing God is just, it seems impossible
His pardon could be real. Thus is the fear of God the sure result of
seeing pardon as unmerited. No one who sees himself as guilty can avoid
the fear of God. But he is saved from this dilemma if he can forgive.
The mind must think of its Creator as it looks upon itself. If you can
see your brother merits pardon, you have learned forgiveness is your
right as much as his. Nor will you think that God intends for you a
fearful judgment which your brother does not merit. For it is the truth
that you can merit neither more nor less than he.

^74^ Forgiveness recognized as merited will heal. It gives the miracle
its strength to overlook illusions. This is how you learn that you must
be forgiven too. There can be no appearance that can *not* be
overlooked. For if there were, it would be necessary first there be some
sin which stands beyond forgiveness. There would be an error that is
more than a mistake-a special form of error which remains unchangeable,
eternal, and beyond correction or escape. There would be one mistake
which had the power to undo creation and to make a world which could
replace it and destroy the Will of God. Only if this were possible could
there be some appearances which could withstand the miracle and not be
healed by it.

^75^ There is no surer proof idolatry is what you wish than a belief
there are some forms of sickness and of joylessness forgiveness cannot
heal. This means that you prefer to keep some idols, and are not
prepared as yet to let all idols go. And thus you think that some
appearances are real and not appearances at all. Be not deceived about
the meaning of a fixed belief that some appearances are harder to look
past than others are. It *always* means you think forgiveness must be
limited. And you have set a goal of partial pardon and a limited escape
from guilt for *you*. What can this be except a false forgiveness of
yourself and everyone who seems apart from you?

^76^ It must be true the miracle can heal *all* forms of sickness, or it
cannot heal. Its purpose cannot be to judge which forms are real and
which appearances are true. If one appearance must remain apart from
healing, one illusion must be part of truth. And you could not escape
all guilt, but only some of it. You must forgive God's Son *entirely.*
Or you will keep an image of yourself that is not whole and will remain
afraid to look within and find escape from every idol there. Salvation
rests on faith there *cannot* be some forms of guilt which you cannot
forgive. And so there cannot be appearances which have replaced the
truth about God's Son.

^77^ Look on your brother with the willingness to see him as he is. And
do not keep a part of him outside your willingness that he be healed. To
heal is to make whole. And what is whole can have no missing parts that
have been kept outside. Forgiveness rests on recognizing this and being
glad there cannot be some forms of sickness which the miracle must lack
the power to heal.

^78^ God's Son is perfect, or he cannot *be* God's Son. Nor will you
know him if you think he does not merit the escape from guilt in *all*
its forms and *all* its consequence. There is no way to think of him but
this if you would know the truth about yourself:

^79^ I thank you, Father, for your perfect Son,\
And in his glory will I see my own.

^80^ Here is the joyful statement that there are no forms of evil which
can overcome the Will of God-the glad acknowledgment that guilt has not
succeeded by your wish to make illusions real. And what is this except a
simple statement of the truth?

^81^ Look on your brother with this hope in you, and you will understand
he could not make an error that could change the truth in him. It is not
difficult to overlook mistakes that have been given no effects. But what
you see as having power to make an idol of the Son of God you will *not*
pardon. For he has become to you a graven image and a sign of death. Is
*this* your savior? Is his Father wrong about His Son? Or have *you*
been deceived in him who has been given you to heal, for *your*
salvation and deliverance?
:::

[]{#part0035_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. The New Interpretation**](#part0004.html#level-259) {#part0035_split_007.html#h1-259 .level1a}

^82^ Would God have left the meaning of the world to your
interpretation? If He had, it *has* no meaning. For it cannot be that
meaning changes constantly and yet is true. The Holy Spirit looks upon
the world as with one purpose, changelessly established. And no
situation can affect its aim but must be in accord with it. For only if
its aim could change with every situation could each one be open to
interpretation which is different every time you think of it. You add an
element into the script you write for every minute in the day, and all
that happens now means something else. You take away another element,
and every meaning shifts accordingly.

^83^ What do your scripts reflect except your plans for what the day
*should* be? And thus you judge disaster and success, advance, retreat,
and gain and loss. These judgments all are made according to the roles
the script assigns. The fact they have no meaning in themselves is
demonstrated by the ease with which these labels change with other
judgments made on different aspects of experience. And then in looking
back you think you see another meaning in what went before. What have
you really done except to show there *was* no meaning there? But you
assigned a meaning in the light of goals that change with every meaning
shifting as they change.

^84^ Only a constant purpose can endow events with stable meaning. But
it must accord *one* meaning to them all. If they are given different
meanings, it must be that they reflect but different purposes. And this
is all the meaning that they have. Can this *be* meaning? Can confusion
be what meaning means? Perception cannot be in constant flux and make
allowance for stability of meaning anywhere. Fear is a judgment never
justified. Its presence has no meaning but to show you wrote a fearful
script and are afraid accordingly. But not because the thing you fear
has fearful meaning in itself.

^85^ A common *purpose* is the only means whereby perception can be
stabilized and one interpretation given to the world and all experiences
here. In this shared purpose is one judgment shared by everyone and
everything you see. You do not have to judge, for you have learned one
meaning has been given everything, and you are glad to see it
everywhere. It cannot change *because* you would perceive it everywhere,
unchanged by circumstance. And so you *offer* it to all events, and let
them offer you stability.

^86^ Escape from judgment simply lies in this-all things have but one
purpose which you share with all the world. And nothing in the world can
be opposed to it, for it belongs to everything as it belongs to you. In
single purpose is the end of all ideas of sacrifice, which must assume a
different purpose for the one who gains and him who loses. There could
be no thought of sacrifice apart from this idea. And it is this idea of
different goals which makes perception shift and meaning change. In one
united goal does this become impossible, for your agreement makes
interpretation stabilize and last.

^87^ How can communication really be established while the symbols which
are used mean different things? The Holy Spirit's goal gives one
interpretation, meaningful to you and to your brother. Thus can you
communicate with him and he with you. In symbols which you both can
understand, the sacrifice of meaning is undone. All sacrifice entails
the loss of your ability to see relationships among events. And looked
at separately, they *have* no meaning. For there is no light by which
they can be seen and understood. They have no purpose. And what they are
for cannot be seen. In any thought of loss, there *is* no meaning. No
one has agreed with you on what it means. It is a part of a distorted
script which cannot be interpreted with meaning. It must be forever
unintelligible. This is not communication. Your dark dreams are but the
senseless, isolated scripts you write in sleep. Look not to separate
dreams for meaning. Only dreams of pardon can be shared. They mean the
same to both of you.

^88^ Do not interpret out of solitude, for what you see means nothing.
It will shift in what it stands for, and you will believe the world is
an uncertain place in which you walk in danger and uncertainty. It is
but your *interpretations* which are lacking in stability, for they are
not in line with what you really are. This is a state so seemingly
unsafe that fear *must* rise. Do not continue thus, my brothers. We have
*one* Interpreter. And through His use of symbols are we joined so that
they mean the same to all of us. Our common language lets us speak to
all our brothers and to understand with them forgiveness has been given
to us all, and thus we can communicate again.
:::

[]{#part0035_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IX. Changeless Reality**](#part0004.html#level-260) {#part0035_split_008.html#h1-260 .level1a}

^89^ Appearances deceive but can be changed. Reality is changeless. It
does not deceive at all, and if you fail to see beyond appearances, you
*are* deceived. For everything you see will change, and yet you thought
it real before, and now you think it real again. Reality is thus reduced
to form and capable of change. Reality is changeless. It is this that
makes it real and keeps it separate from *all* appearances. It must
transcend all form to be itself. It *cannot* change.

^90^ The miracle is means to demonstrate that all appearances can change
because they *are* appearances and cannot have the changelessness
reality entails. The miracle attests salvation from appearances by
*showing* they can change. Your brother has a changelessness in him
beyond appearance and deception both. It is obscured by changing views
of him which you *perceive* as his reality. The happy dream about him
takes the form of the appearance of his perfect health, his perfect
freedom from all forms of lack, and safety from disaster of all kinds.
The miracle is proof he is not bound by loss or suffering in any form
because it can so easily be *changed.* This demonstrates that it was
*never* real and could not stem from his reality. For that is changeless
and has no effects which anything in Heaven or on earth could ever
alter. But appearances are shown to be unreal *because* they change.

^91^ What is temptation but a wish to make illusions real? It does not
seem to be the wish that no reality be so. Yet it is an assertion that
some forms of idols have a powerful appeal which makes them harder to
resist than those you would not *want* to have reality. Temptation,
then, is nothing more than this-a prayer the miracle touch not some
dreams but keep their unreality obscure and give to them reality
instead. And Heaven gives no answer to the prayer, nor can a miracle be
given you to heal appearances you do not like. You have established
*limits*. What you ask *is* given you, but not of God Who knows no
limits. You have limited *yourself.*

^92^ Reality is changeless. Miracles but show what you have interposed
between reality and your awareness is unreal and does not interfere at
all. The cost of the belief there must be some appearances beyond the
hope of change is that the miracle cannot come forth from you
consistently. For you have *asked* it be withheld from power to heal all
dreams. There is no miracle you cannot have when you *desire* healing.
But there is no miracle that can be given you *unless* you want it.
Choose what you would heal, and He Who gives all miracles has not been
given freedom to bestow His gifts upon God's Son. When he is tempted, he
denies reality. And he becomes the willing slave of what he chose
instead.

^93^ *Because* reality is changeless is a miracle already there to heal
all things that change and offer them to you to see in happy form,
devoid of fear. It will be given you to look upon your brother thus. But
not while you would have it otherwise in some respects. For this but
means you would not have him healed and whole. The Christ in him is
perfect. Is it this that you would look upon? Then let there be no
dreams about him which you would prefer to seeing this. And you will see
the Christ in him because you *let* Him come to you. And when He has
appeared to you, you will be certain you are like Him, for He is the
changeless in your brother *and* in you.

^94^ This will you look upon when you decide there is not one appearance
you would hold in place of what your brother really is. Let no
temptation to prefer a dream allow uncertainty to enter here. Be not
made guilty and afraid when you are tempted by a dream of what he is.
But do not give it power to replace the changeless in him in your sight
of him. There is no false appearance but will fade if you request a
miracle instead. There is no pain from which he is not free if you would
have him be but what he is. Why should you fear to see the Christ in
him? You but behold *your Self* in what you see. As he is healed are you
made free of guilt, for his appearance *is* your own to you.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Chapter 31**](#part0004.html#chap-31) {#part0036_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}

# [**The Simplicity of Salvation**](#part0004.html#chap-31) {.chapter-title}

# [**I. Introduction**](#part0004.html#level-261) {#part0036_split_000.html#h1-261 .level1a1}

^31:1^ How simple is salvation! All it says is what was never true is
not true now and never will be. The impossible has not occurred and can
have no effects. And that is all. Can this be hard to learn by anyone
who *wants* it to be true? Only unwillingness to learn it could make
such an easy lesson difficult. How hard is it to see that what is false
cannot be true, and what is true cannot be false? You can no longer say
that you perceive no differences in false and true. You have been told
exactly how to tell one from the other and just what to do if you become
confused. Why then do you persist in learning not such simple things?

^2^ There *is* a reason. But confuse it not with difficulty in the
simple things salvation asks you learn. It teaches but the very obvious.
It merely goes from one apparent lesson to the next in easy steps which
lead you gently from one to another with no strain at all. This cannot
be confusing, yet you *are* confused. For somehow you believe that what
is totally confused is easier to learn and understand. What you have
taught yourselves is such a giant learning feat it is indeed incredible.
But you accomplished it because you wanted to and did not pause in
diligence to judge it hard to learn, or too complex to grasp.

^3^ No one who understands what you have learned, how carefully you have
learned it, and the pains to which you went to practice and repeat the
lessons endlessly in every form you could conceive of them could ever
doubt the power of your learning skill. There is no greater power in the
world. The world was made by it and even now depends on nothing else.
The lessons you have taught yourselves have been so overlearned and
fixed they rise like heavy curtains to obscure the simple and the
obvious. Say not you cannot learn *them*. For your power to learn is
strong enough to teach you that your will is not your own, your thoughts
do not belong to you, and even you are someone else.

^4^ Who could maintain that lessons such as these are easy? Yet you have
learned more than this. You have continued, taking every step, however
difficult, without complaint until a world was built that suited you.
And every lesson that makes up the world arises from the first
accomplishment of learning-an enormity so great the Holy Spirit's Voice
seems small and still before its magnitude. The world began with one
strange lesson, powerful enough to render God forgotten and His Son an
alien to himself, in exile from the home where God Himself established
him. You who have taught yourselves the Son of God is guilty, say not
that you cannot learn the simple things salvation teaches you!

^5^ Learning is an ability you made and gave yourselves. It was not made
to do the Will of God but to uphold a wish that It could be opposed, and
that a will apart from It was yet more real than It. And this has
learning sought to demonstrate, and you have learned what it was made to
teach. Now does your ancient overlearning stand implacable before the
Voice of truth and teach you that Its lessons are not true, too hard to
learn, too difficult to see, and too opposed to what is really true. Yet
you *will* learn them, for their learning is the only purpose for your
learning skill the Holy Spirit sees in all the world. His simple lessons
in forgiveness have a power mightier than yours because they call from
God and from your Self to you.

^6^ Is this a *little* Voice, so small and still It cannot rise above
the senseless noise of sounds which have no meaning? God willed not His
Son forget Him. And the power of His Will is in the Voice that speaks
for Him. Which lesson will you learn? What outcome is inevitable, sure
as God, and far beyond all doubt and question? Can it be your little
learning, strange in outcome and incredible in difficulty, will
withstand the simple lessons being taught to you in every moment of each
day, since time began and learning had been made?

^7^ The lessons to be learned are only two. Each has its outcome in a
different world. And each world follows surely from its source. The
certain outcome of the lesson that God's Son is guilty is the world you
see. It *is* a world of terror and despair. Nor is there hope of
happiness in it. There is no plan for safety you can make that ever will
succeed. There is no joy that you can seek for here and hope to find.
Yet this is not the only outcome which your learning can produce.
However much you may have overlearned your chosen task, the lesson which
reflects the love of God is stronger still. And you *will* learn God's
Son is innocent and see another world.

^8^ The outcome of the lesson that God's Son is guiltless is a world in
which there is no fear and everything is lit with hope and sparkles with
a gentle friendliness. Nothing but calls to you in soft appeal to be
your friend and let it join with you. And never does a call remain
unheard, misunderstood, nor left unanswered in the selfsame tongue in
which the call was made. And you will understand it was this call that
everyone and everything within the world has *always* made, but you had
not perceived it as it was. And now you see you were mistaken. You had
been deceived by forms the call was hidden in. And so you did not hear
it and had lost a friend who always wanted to be part of you. The soft,
eternal calling of each part of God's creation to the whole is heard
throughout the world this second lesson brings.

^9^ There is no living thing which does not share the universal will
that it be whole and that you do not leave its call unheard. Without
your answer is it left to die, as it is saved from death when you have
heard its calling as the ancient call to life and understood that it is
but your own. The Christ in you remembers God with all the certainty
with which He knows His love. But only if His Son is innocent can He be
Love. For God were fear indeed if he whom He created innocent could be a
slave to guilt. God's perfect Son remembers his creation. But in guilt
he has forgotten what he really is.

^10^ The fear of God results as surely from the lesson that His Son is
guilty as God's love must be remembered when he learns his innocence.
For hate must father fear and look upon its father as itself. How wrong
are you who fail to hear the call that echoes past each seeming call to
death, that sings behind each murderous attack and pleads that love
restore the dying world! You do not understand Who calls to you beyond
each form of hate, each call to war. Yet you will recognize Him as you
give Him answer in the language that He calls. He will appear when you
have answered Him, and you will know in Him that God *is* Love.

^11^ What is temptation but a wish to make the wrong decision on what
you would learn and have an outcome that you do not want? It is the
recognition that it is a state of mind unwanted that becomes the means
whereby the choice is reassessed; another outcome seen to be preferred.
You are deceived if you believe you want disaster and disunity and pain.
Hear not the call for this within yourself. But listen, rather, to the
deeper call beyond it that appeals for peace and joy. And all the world
will *give* you joy and peace. For as you hear, you answer. And behold!
Your answer is the proof of what you learned. Its outcome is the world
you look upon.

^12^ Let us be still an instant and forget all things we ever learned,
all thoughts we had, and every preconception which we hold of what
things mean and what their purpose is. Let us remember not our own ideas
of what the world is for. We do not know. Let every image held of
everyone be loosened from our minds and swept away. Be innocent of
judgment, unaware of any thoughts of evil or of good that ever crossed
your mind of anyone. Now do we know him not. But you *are* free to learn
of him and learn of him anew. Now is he born again to you, and you are
born again to him without the past that sentenced him to die, and you
with him. Now is he free to live, as you are free because an ancient
learning passed away and left a place for truth to be reborn.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**II. The Illusion of an Enemy**](#part0004.html#level-262) {#part0036_split_001.html#h1-262 .level1a}

^13^ An ancient lesson is not overcome by the opposing of the new and
old. It is not vanquished that the truth be known nor fought against to
lose to truth's appeal. There is no battle which must be prepared, no
time to be expended, and no plans that need be laid for bringing in the
new. There *is* an ancient battle being waged *against* the truth, but
truth does not respond. Who could be hurt in such a war unless he hurts
himself? He has no enemy in truth. And can he be assailed by dreams?

^14^ Let us review again what seems to stand between you and the truth
of what you are. For there are steps in its relinquishment. The first is
a decision that *you* make. But afterwards the truth is *given* you. You
would *establish* truth. And by your wish, you set two choices to be
made each time you think you must decide on anything. Neither is true.
Nor are they different. Yet must we see them both before you can look
past them to the one alternative that *is* a different choice. But not
in dreams you made that this might be obscured to you.

^15^ What *you* would choose between is not a choice and gives but the
illusion it is free, for it will have one outcome either way. Thus is it
really not a choice at all. The leader and the follower emerge as
separate roles, each seeming to possess advantages you would not want to
lose. So in their fusion there appears to be the hope of satisfaction
and of peace. You see yourself divided into both these roles, forever
split between the two. And every friend or enemy becomes a means to help
you save yourself from this.

^16^ Perhaps you call it love. Perhaps you think that it is murder
justified at last. You hate the one you gave the leader's role when you
would have it, and you hate as well his not assuming it at times you
want to let the follower in you arise and give away the role of
leadership. And this is what you made your brother *for* and learned to
think that this his purpose *is*. Unless he serves it, he has not
fulfilled the function that was given him by you. And thus he merits
death because he has no purpose and no usefulness to you.

^17^ And what of him? What does he want of you? What could he want, but
what you want of him? Herein is life as easily as death, for what you
choose, you choose as well for him. Two calls you make to him, as he to
you. Between *these* two *is* choice because from them there *is* a
different outcome. If he be the leader or the follower to you, it
matters not, for you have chosen death. But if he calls for death or
calls for life, for hate or for forgiveness and for help, is not the
same in outcome. Hear the one, and you are separate from him and are
lost. But hear the other, and you join with him, and in your answer is
salvation found. The voice you hear in him is but your own. What does he
ask you for? And listen well! For he is asking what will come to you
because you see an image of *yourself* and hear *your* voice requesting
what you *want.*

^18^ Before you answer, pause to think of this:

^19^ The answer that I give my brother is\
What I am asking for. And what I learn\
Of him is what I learn about myself.

^20^ Then let us wait an instant and be still, forgetting everything we
thought we heard; remembering how much we do not know. This brother
neither leads nor follows us but walks beside us on the selfsame road.
He is like us, as near or far away from what we want as we will let him
be. We make no gains he does not make with us, and we fall back if he
does not advance. Take not his hand in anger but in love, for in his
progress do you count your own. And we go separately along the way
unless you keep him safely by your side.

^21^ Because he is your equal in God's love, you will be saved from all
appearances and answer to the Christ Who calls to you. Be still and
listen. Think not ancient thoughts. Forget the dismal lessons that you
learned about this Son of God who calls to you. Christ calls to all with
equal tenderness, seeing no leaders and no followers and hearing but one
answer to them all. Because He hears one Voice, He cannot hear a
different answer from the one He gave when God appointed Him His only
Son.

^22^ Be very still an instant. Come without all thought of what you ever
learned before and put aside all images you made. The old will fall away
before the new without your opposition or intent. There will be no
attack upon the things you thought were precious and in need of care.
There will be no assault upon your wish to hear a call that never has
been made. Nothing will hurt you in this holy place to which you come to
listen silently and learn the truth of what you really want. No more
than this will you be asked to learn. But as you hear it, you will
understand you need but come away without the thoughts you did not want
and that were never true.

^23^ Forgive your brother all appearances, which are but ancient lessons
that you taught yourself about the sinfulness in *you*. Hear but his
call for mercy and release from all the fearful images he holds of what
he is and of what you must be. He is afraid to walk with you and thinks
perhaps a bit behind, a bit ahead, would be a safer place for him to be.
Can *you* make progress if you think the same, advancing only when he
would step back and falling back when he would go ahead? For so do you
forget the journey's goal, which is but to decide to walk *with* him, so
neither leads nor follows. Thus it is a way you go *together*, not
alone. And in this choice is learning's outcome changed, for Christ has
been reborn to both of you.

^24^ An instant spent without your old ideas of who your great companion
is and what he *should* be asking for will be enough to let this happen.
And you will perceive his purpose is the same as yours. He asks for what
*you* want and needs the same as *you*. It takes perhaps a different
form in him, but it is not the form you answer to. He asks and you
receive, for you have come with but one purpose-that you both may learn
you love each other with a brother's love. And as a brother, must his
Father be the same as yours, as he is like yourself.

^25^ Together is your joint inheritance remembered and accepted by you
both. Alone it is denied to both of you. Is it not clear that while you
still insist on leading or on following, you think you walk alone with
no one by your side? This is the road to nowhere, for the light cannot
be given while you walk alone, and so you cannot see which way you go.
And thus there is confusion and a sense of endless doubting as you
stagger back and forward in the darkness and alone. Yet these are but
appearances of what the journey is and how it must be made. For next to
you is One Who holds the light before you so that every step is made in
certainty and sureness of the road. A blindfold can indeed obscure your
sight but cannot make the way itself grow dark. And He Who travels with
you *has* the light.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**III. The Self-Accused**](#part0004.html#level-263) {#part0036_split_002.html#h1-263 .level1a}

^26^ Only the self-accused condemn. As you prepare to make a choice that
will result in different outcomes, there is first one thing that must be
overlearned. It must become a habit of response so typical of everything
you do that it becomes your first response to all temptation and to
every situation that occurs. Learn this and learn it well, for it is
here delay of happiness is shortened by a span of time you cannot
realize. You never hate your brother for his sins, but *only* for your
own. Whatever form his sins appear to take, it but obscures the fact
that you believe them to be yours and therefore meriting a "just"
attack.

^27^ Why should his sins *be* sins if you did not believe they could not
be forgiven in you? Why are they real in him if you did not believe that
they are your reality? And why do you attack them everywhere except you
hate yourself? Are *you* a sin? You answer "yes" whenever you attack,
for by attack do you assert that you are guilty and must give as you
deserve. And what can you deserve but what you *are*? If you did not
believe that you deserved attack, it never would occur to you to *give*
attack to anyone at all. Why should you? What would be the gain to you?
What could the outcome be that you would *want*? And how *could* murder
bring you benefit?

^28^ Sins are in bodies. They are not perceived in minds. They are not
seen as purposes but actions. Bodies act, and minds do not. And
therefore must the body be at fault for what it does. It is not seen to
be a passive thing, obeying your commands and doing nothing of itself at
all. If you are sin you *are* a body, for the mind acts not. And purpose
must be in the body, not the mind. The body must act on its own and
motivate itself. If you are sin, you lock the mind within the body, and
you give its purpose to its prison-house, which acts instead of it. A
jailer does not follow orders, but *enforces* orders on the prisoner.

^29^ Yet is the *body* prisoner and *not* the mind. The body thinks no
thoughts. It has no power to learn, to pardon, nor enslave. It gives no
orders that the mind need serve nor sets conditions that it must obey.
It holds in prison but the willing mind that would abide in it. It
sickens at the bidding of the mind that would become its prisoner. And
it grows old and dies because that mind is sick within itself. Learning
is all that causes change. And so the body, where no learning can occur,
could never change unless the mind preferred the body change in its
appearances to suit the purpose given by the mind. For it *can* learn,
and *there* is all change made.

^30^ The mind that thinks it is a sin has but one purpose-that the body
be the source of sin and keep it in the prison-house it chose and guards
and hold itself at bay, a sleeping prisoner to the snarling dogs of hate
and evil, sickness and attack, of pain and age, of grief and suffering.
Here are the thoughts of sacrifice preserved, for here guilt rules and
orders that the world be like itself-a place where nothing can find
mercy or survive the ravages of fear except in murder and in death. For
here are you made sin, and sin cannot abide the joyous and the free, for
they are enemies which sin must kill. In death is sin preserved, and
those who think that they are sin must die for what they think they are.

^31^ Let us be glad that you *will* see what you believe, and that it
has been given you to *change* what you believe. The body will but
follow. It can never lead you where you would not be. It does not guard
your sleep nor interfere with your awakening. Release your body from
imprisonment, and you will see no one as prisoner to what you have
escaped. You will not want to hold in guilt your chosen enemies nor keep
in chains to the illusion of a changing love the ones you think are
friends.

^32^ The innocent release in gratitude for *their* release. And what
they see upholds their freedom from imprisonment and death. Open your
mind to change, and there will be no ancient penalty exacted from your
brother *or* yourself. For God has said there *is* no sacrifice that can
be asked; there *is* no sacrifice that can be made.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**IV. The Real Alternative**](#part0004.html#level-264) {#part0036_split_003.html#h1-264 .level1a}

^33^ There is a tendency to think the world can offer consolation and
escape from problems which its purpose is to *keep*. Why should this be?
Because it is a place where choice among illusions seems to be the
*only* choice. And you are in control of outcomes of your choosing. Thus
you think within the narrow band from birth to death a little time is
given you to use for you alone, a time when everyone conflicts with you,
but you can choose which road will lead you out of conflict and away
from difficulties which concern you not. Yet they *are* your concern.
How then can you escape from them by leaving them behind? What must go
with you, you will take with you whatever road you choose to walk along.

^34^ *Real* choice is no illusion. But the world has none to offer. All
its roads but lead to disappointment, nothingness, and death. There *is*
no choice in its alternatives. Seek not escape from problems here. The
world was made that problems could not *be* escaped. Be not deceived by
all the different names its roads are given. They have but one end. And
each is but the means to gain that end, for it is here that all its
roads will lead, however differently they seem to start, however
differently they seem to go. Their end is certain, for there is no
choice among them. All of them will lead to death. On some you travel
gaily for a while before the bleakness enters. And on some the thorns
are felt at once. The choice is not *what* will the ending be but *when*
it comes.

^35^ There is no choice where every end is sure. Perhaps you would
prefer to try them all before you really learn they are but one. The
roads this world can offer seem to be quite large in number, but the
time must come when everyone begins to see how like they are to one
another. Men have died on seeing this because they saw no way except the
pathways offered by the world. And learning they led nowhere, lost their
hope. And yet this was the time they could have learned their greatest
lesson. All must reach this point and go beyond it. It is true indeed
there is no choice at all within the world. But this is not the lesson
in itself. The lesson has a purpose, and in *this* you come to
understand what it is *for*.

^36^ Why would you seek to try another road, another person, or another
place when you have learned the way the lesson starts but do not yet
perceive what it is for? Its purpose is the *answer* to the search that
all must undertake who still believe there is another answer to be
found. Learn now, without despair, there is no hope of answer in the
world. But do not judge the lesson which is but *begun* with this. Seek
not another signpost in the world which seems to point to still another
road. No longer look for hope where there is none. Make fast your
learning *now,* and understand you but waste time unless you go beyond
what you have learned to what is yet to learn. For from this lowest
point will learning lead to heights of happiness in which you see the
purpose of the lesson shining clear, and perfectly within your learning
grasp.

^37^ Who would be willing to be turned away from all the roadways of the
world unless he understood their real futility? Is it not needful that
he should begin with this, to seek another way instead? For while he
sees a choice where there is none, what power of decision can he use?
The great release of power must begin with learning where it really has
a *use*. And what decision has power if it be applied in situations
without choice?

^38^ The learning that the world can offer but one choice, no matter
what its form may be, is the beginning of acceptance that there is a
*real* alternative instead. To fight against this step is to defeat your
purpose here. You did not come to learn to find a road the world does
not contain. The search for different pathways in the world is but the
search for different forms of truth. And this would *keep* the truth
from being reached.

^39^ Think not that happiness is ever found by following a road *away*
from it. This makes no sense and *cannot* be the way. To you who seem to
find this course to be too difficult to learn, let me repeat that to
achieve a goal you must proceed in its direction, *not* away from it.
And every road that leads the other way will not advance the purpose to
be found. If *this* be difficult to understand, then *is* this course
impossible to learn. But only then. For otherwise, it is a simple
teaching in the obvious.

^40^ There *is* a choice which you have power to make when you have seen
the real alternatives. Until that point is reached, you *have* no
choice, and you can but decide how you would choose the better to
deceive yourself again. This course attempts to teach no more than that
the power of decision cannot lie in choosing different forms of what is
still the *same* illusion and the *same* mistake. All choices in the
world depend on this-you choose between your brother and yourself, and
you will gain as much as he will lose, and what you lose is what is
given him. How utterly opposed to truth is this, when what the lesson's
purpose is to teach that what your brother loses *you* have lost, and
what he gains is what is given *you*.

^41^ He has not left His Thoughts! But you forgot His Presence and
remembered not His Love. No pathway in the world can lead to Him, nor
any worldly goal is one with His. What road in all the world will lead
within, when every road was made to separate the journey from the
purpose it *must* have unless it be but futile wandering? All roads that
lead away from what you are will lead you to confusion and despair. Yet
has He never left His Thoughts to die, without their Source forever in
themselves. He has not left His Thoughts! He could no more depart from
them than they could keep Him out. In unity with Him do they abide, and
in their Oneness both are kept complete.

^42^ There *is* no road that leads away from Him. A journey from
*yourself* does not exist. How foolish and insane it is to think that
there could be a road with such an aim! Where could it go? And how could
you be made to travel on it, walking there without your own reality at
one with you? Forgive yourself your madness and forget all senseless
journeys and all goal-less aims. They have no meaning. You can not
escape from what you are. For God *is* merciful and did not let His Son
abandon Him. For what He is, be thankful, for in that is your escape
from madness and from death. Nowhere but where He is can *you* be found.
There *is* no path that does not lead to Him.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**V. Self-Concept versus Self**](#part0004.html#level-265) {#part0036_split_004.html#h1-265 .level1a}

^43^ The learning of the world is built upon a concept of the self
adjusted to the world's reality. It fits it well. For this an image is
that suits a world of shadows and illusions. Here it walks at home,
where what it sees is one with it. The building of a concept of the self
is what the learning of the world is *for*. This is its purpose-that you
come without a self and make one as you go along. And by the time you
reach "maturity," you have perfected it to meet the world on equal
terms, at one with its demands.

^44^ A *concept* of the self is made by *you*. It bears no likeness to
yourself at all. It is an idol, made to take the place of your reality
as Son of God. The concept of the self the world would teach is not the
thing that it appears to be. For it is made to serve two purposes, but
one of which the mind can recognize. The first presents the face of
innocence, the aspect acted *on*. It is this face that smiles and charms
and even seems to love. It searches for companions, and it looks at
times with pity on the suffering, and sometimes offers solace. It
believes that it is good within an evil world.

^45^ This aspect can grow angry, for the world is wicked and unable to
provide the love and shelter innocence deserves. And so this face is
often wet with tears at the injustices the world accords to those who
would be generous and good. This aspect never makes the first attack.
But every day a hundred little things make small assaults upon its
innocence, provoking it to irritation and at last to open insult and
abuse.

^46^ The face of innocence the concept of the self so proudly wears can
tolerate attack in self-defense, for is it not a well-known fact the
world deals harshly with defenseless innocence? No one who makes a
picture of himself omits this face, for he has need of it. The other
side he does not *want* to see. Yet it is here the learning of the world
has set its sights, for it is here the world's "reality" is set to see
to it the idol lasts.

^47^ Beneath the face of innocence there is a lesson that the concept of
the self was made to teach. It is a lesson in a terrible displacement
and a fear so devastating that the face which smiles above it must
forever look away, lest it perceive the treachery it hides. The lesson
teaches this: "I am the thing you made of me, and as you look on me, you
stand condemned because of what I am." On this conception of the self
the world smiles with approval, for it guarantees the pathways of the
world are safely kept and those who walk on them will not escape.

^48^ Here is the central lesson that ensures your brother is condemned
eternally. For what you are has now become *his* sin. For this is no
forgiveness possible. No longer does it matter what he does, for your
accusing finger points to him, unwavering and deadly in its aim. It
points to you as well, but this is kept still deeper in the mists below
the face of innocence. And in these shrouded vaults are all his sins and
yours preserved and kept in darkness where they cannot be perceived as
errors, which the light would surely show. You can be neither blamed for
what you are, nor can you change the things it makes you do. And you are
each the symbol of your sins to one another, silently, and yet with
ceaseless urgency condemning still your brother for the hated thing you
are.

^49^ Concepts are learned. They are not natural. Apart from learning,
they do not exist. They are not given, and they must be made. Not one of
them is true, and many come from feverish imaginations, hot with hatred
and distortions born of fear. What is a concept but a thought to which
its maker gives a meaning of his own? Concepts maintain the world. But
they cannot be used to demonstrate the world is real. For all of them
are made within the world, born in its shadow, growing in its ways, and
finally "maturing" in its thought. They are ideas of idols painted with
the brushes of the world, which cannot make a single picture
representing truth.

^50^ A concept of the self is meaningless, for no one here can see what
it is *for* and therefore cannot picture what it *is*. Yet is all
learning which the world directs begun and ended with the single aim of
teaching you this concept of yourself, that you will choose to follow
this world's laws and never seek to go beyond its roads nor realize the
way you see yourself. Now must the Holy Spirit find a way to help you
see this concept of the self must be undone if any peace of mind is to
be given you. Nor can it be unlearned except by lessons aimed to teach
that you are something *else*. For otherwise you would be asked to make
exchange of what you now believe for total loss of self, and greater
terror would arise in you.

^51^ Thus are the Holy Spirit's lesson plans arranged in easy steps that
though there be some lack of ease at times and some distress, there is
no shattering of what was learned, but just a re-translation of what
seems to be the evidence on its behalf. Let us consider then what proof
there is that you are what your brother made of you. For even though you
do not yet perceive that this is what you think, you surely learned by
now that you *behave* as if it were. Does *he* react for *you*? And did
he know exactly what would happen? Could he see your future and ordain
before it came what you should do in every circumstance? He must have
made the world as well as you to have such prescience in the things to
come.

^52^ That you are what your brother made of you seems most unlikely.
Even if he did, who gave the face of innocence to you? Is this *your*
contribution? Who is, then, the "you" who made it? And who is deceived
by all your goodness and attacks it so? Let us forget the concept's
foolishness and merely think of this-there are two parts to what you
think yourself to be. If one was generated by your brother, who was
there to make the other? And from whom must something be kept hidden? If
the world be evil, there is still no need to hide what *you* are made
of. Who is there to see? And what but is attacked could *need* defense?

^53^ Perhaps the reason why this concept must be kept in darkness is
that in the light the one who would not think it true is *you*. And what
would happen to the world you know if all its underpinnings were
removed? Your concept of the world *depends* upon this concept of the
self. And both would go if either one were ever raised to doubt. The
Holy Spirit does not seek to throw you into panic. So He merely asks if
just a *little* question might be raised.

^54^ There are alternatives about the thing that you must be. You might
for instance be the thing you chose to have your *brother* be. This
shifts the concept of the self from what is wholly passive, and at least
makes way for active choice and some acknowledgment that interaction
must have entered in. There is some understanding that you chose for
both of you, and what he represents has meaning that was given it by
you. It also shows some glimmering of sight into perception's law that
what you see reflects the state of the *perceiver's* mind. Yet who was
it that did the choosing first? If you are what you chose your brother
be, alternatives were there to choose among, and someone must have first
decided on the one to choose and let the others go.

^55^ Although this step has gains, it does not yet approach a basic
question. Something must have gone *before* these concepts of the self.
And something must have done the learning which gave rise to them. Nor
can this be explained by either view. The main advantage of the shifting
to the second from the first is that *you* somehow entered in the choice
by your decision. But this gain is paid in almost equal loss, for now
*you* stand accused of guilt for what your brother is. And you must
share his guilt because you chose it for him in the image of your own.
While only he was treacherous before, now must you be condemned along
with him.

^56^ The concept of the self has always been the great preoccupation of
the world. And everyone believes that he must find the answer to the
riddle of himself. Salvation can be seen as nothing more than the
*escape* from concepts. It does not concern itself with content of the
mind, but with the simple statement that it *thinks*. And what can think
has choice and *can* be shown that different thoughts have different
consequence. So it can learn that everything it thinks reflects the deep
confusion that it feels about how it was made and what it is. And
vaguely does the concept of the self appear to answer what it does not
know.

^57^ Seek not your Self in symbols. There can *be* no concept that can
stand for what you are. What matters it which concept you accept while
you perceive a self which interacts with evil and reacts to wicked
things? Your concept of yourself will still remain quite meaningless.
And you will not perceive that you can interact but with yourself. To
see a guilty world is but the sign your learning has been guided by the
world, and you behold it as you see yourself. The concept of the self
embraces all you look upon, and nothing is outside of this perception.
If you can be hurt by anything, you see a picture of your secret wishes.
Nothing more than this. And in your suffering of any kind, you see your
own concealed desire to kill.

^58^ You will make many concepts of the self as learning goes along.
Each one will show the changes in your own relationships as your
perception of yourself is changed. There will be some confusion every
time there is a shift, but be you thankful that the learning of the
world is loosening its grasp upon your mind. And be sure and happy in
the confidence that it will go at last and leave your mind at peace. The
role of the accuser will appear in many places and in many forms. And
each will seem to be accusing *you*. Yet have no fear it will not be
undone.

^59^ The world can teach no images of you unless you *want* to learn
them. There will come a time when images have all gone by, and you will
see you know not what you are. It is to this unsealed and open mind that
truth returns, unhindered and unbound. Where concepts of the self have
been laid by is truth revealed exactly as it *is*. When every concept
has been raised to doubt and question and been recognized as made on no
assumptions which would stand the light, then is the truth left free to
enter in its sanctuary, clean and free of guilt. There is no statement
that the world is more afraid to hear than this:

^60^ I do not know the thing I am and therefore do not know\
what I am doing, where I am, or how to look upon the world\
or on myself.

^61^ Yet in this learning is salvation born. And what you are will
*tell* you of Itself.
:::

[]{#part0036_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VI. Recognizing the Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-266) {#part0036_split_005.html#h1-266 .level1a}

^62^ You see the flesh or recognize the Spirit. There is no compromise
between the two. If one is real the other must be false, for what is
real denies its opposite. There is no choice in vision but this one.
What you decide in this determines *all* you see and think is real and
hold as true. On this one choice does all your world depend, for here
have you established what you are, as flesh or Spirit in your own
belief. If you choose flesh, you never will escape the body as your own
reality, for you have chosen that you *want* it so. But choose the
Spirit, and all Heaven bends to touch your eyes and bless your holy
sight, that you may see the world of flesh no more except to heal and
comfort and to bless.

^63^ Salvation is undoing. If you choose to see the body, you behold a
world of separation, unrelated things, and happenings that make no sense
at all. This one appears and disappears in death; that one is doomed to
suffering and loss. And no one is exactly as he was an instant previous,
nor will he be the same as he is now an instant hence. Who could have
trust where so much change is seen, for who is worthy if he be but dust?
Salvation is undoing of all this. And constancy arises in the sight of
those whose eyes salvation has released from looking at the cost of
keeping guilt because they chose to let it go instead.

^64^ Salvation does not ask that you behold the Spirit and perceive the
body not. It merely asks that this should be your *choice*. For you can
see the body without help but do not understand how to behold a world
apart from it. It is your world salvation will undo and let you see
another world *your* eyes could never find. Be not concerned how this
could ever be. You do not understand how what you see arose to meet your
sight. For if you did, it would be gone. The veil of ignorance is drawn
across the evil and the good and must be passed that both may disappear,
so that perception finds no hiding place. How is this done? It is not
done at all. What could there be within the universe which God created
that must still be done?

^65^ Only in arrogance could you conceive that *you* must make the way
to Heaven plain. The means are given you by which to see the world that
will replace the one you made. Your will be done! In Heaven as on earth,
this is forever true. It matters not where you believe you are nor what
you think the truth about yourself must really be. It makes no
difference what you look upon nor what you choose to feel or think or
wish. For God Himself has said, "Your will be done." And it *is* done to
you accordingly.

^66^ You who believe that you can choose to see the Son of God as you
would have him be, forget not that no concept of yourself will stand
against the truth of what you are. Undoing truth would be impossible.
But concepts are not difficult to change. *One* vision, clearly seen,
that does not fit the picture as it was perceived before will change the
world for eyes that learn to see, because the concept of the *self* has
changed. Are *you* invulnerable? Then the world is harmless in your
sight. Do *you* forgive? Then is the world forgiving, for you have
forgiven it its trespasses and so it looks on you with eyes that see as
yours. Are *you* a body? So is all the world perceived as treacherous
and out to kill.

^67^ Are you a spirit, deathless and without the promise of corruption
and the stain of sin upon you? So the world is seen as stable, fully
worthy of your trust; a happy place to rest in for a while, where
nothing need be feared but only loved. Who is unwelcome to the kind in
heart? And what could hurt the truly innocent? Your will be done, you
holy Child of God. It does not matter if you think you are in earth or
Heaven. What your Father wills for you can never change. The truth in
you remains as radiant as a star, as pure as light, as innocent as Love
Itself. And you *are* worthy that your Will be done!
:::

[]{#part0036_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VII. The Savior's Vision**](#part0004.html#level-267) {#part0036_split_006.html#h1-267 .level1a}

^68^ Learning is change. Salvation does not seek to use a means as yet
too alien to your thinking to be helpful nor to make the kinds of change
you could not recognize. Concepts are needed while perception lasts, and
*changing* concepts is salvation's task. For it must deal in contrasts,
not in truth, which has no opposite and cannot change. In this world's
concepts are the guilty "bad;" the "good" are innocent. And no one here
but holds a concept of himself in which he counts the "good" to pardon
him the "bad." Nor does he trust the "good" in anyone, believing that
the "bad" must lurk behind. This concept emphasizes treachery, and trust
becomes impossible. Nor could it change while you perceive the "bad" in
*you*.

^69^ You could not *recognize* your "evil" thoughts as long as you see
value in attack. You will perceive them sometimes, but will not see them
as meaningless. And so they come in fearful form, with content still
concealed, to shake your sorry concept of yourself and blacken it with
still another "crime." You cannot give yourself your innocence, for you
are too confused about yourself. But should *one* brother dawn upon your
sight as wholly worthy of forgiveness, then your concept of yourself
*is* wholly changed*. Your* "evil" thoughts have been forgiven with his,
because you let them all affect you not. No longer did you choose that
you should be the sign of evil and of guilt in him. And as you gave your
trust to what is good in him, you gave it to the good in you.

^70^ In terms of concepts, it is thus you see him more than just a body,
for the good is never what the body seems to be. The actions of the body
are perceived as coming from the "baser" part of you and thus of him as
well. By focusing upon the good in him, the body grows decreasingly
persistent in your sight and will at length be seen as little more than
just a shadow circling round the good. And this will be your concept of
*yourself*, when you have reached the world beyond the sight your eyes
alone can offer you to see. For you will not interpret what you see
without the Aid that God has given you. And in His sight there *is*
another world.

^71^ You live in that world just as much as this. For both are concepts
of yourself which can be interchanged, but never jointly held. The
contrast is far greater than you think, for you will love this concept
of yourself because it was not made for you alone. Born as a gift for
someone not perceived to be yourself, it has been given *you*. For your
forgiveness, offered unto him, has been accepted now for *both* of you.

^72^ Have faith in him who walks with you, so that your fearful concept
of yourself may change. And look upon the good in him that you may not
be frightened by your "evil" thoughts because they do not cloud your
view of him. And all this shift requires is that you be *willing* that
this happy change occur. No more than this is asked. On its behalf,
remember what the concept of yourself which now you hold has brought you
in its wake, and welcome the glad contrast offered you. Hold out your
hand that you may have the gift of kind forgiveness which you offer one
whose need for it is just the same as yours. And let the cruel concept
of yourself be changed to one which brings the peace of God.

^73^ The concept of yourself which now you hold would guarantee your
function here remain forever unaccomplished and undone. And thus it
dooms you to a bitter sense of deep depression and futility. Yet it need
not be fixed unless you choose to hold it past the hope of change and
keep it static and concealed within your mind. Give it instead to Him
Who understands the changes that it needs to let it serve the function
given you to bring you peace that you may offer peace to have it yours.
Alternatives are in your mind to use, and you *can* see yourself another
way. Would you not rather look upon yourself as *needed* for salvation
of the world instead of as salvation's enemy?

^74^ The concept of the self stands like a shield, a silent barricade
before the truth, and hides it from your sight. All things you see are
images because you look on them as through a barrier which dims your
sight and warps your vision, so that you behold nothing with clarity.
The light is kept from everything you see. At most, you glimpse a shadow
of what lies beyond. At least, you merely look on darkness and perceive
the terrified imaginings that come from guilty thoughts and concepts
born of fear. And what you see *is* hell, for fear is hell. All that is
given you is for release-the sight, the vision, and the inner Guide all
lead you out of hell with those you love beside you and the universe
with them.

^75^ Behold your role within the universe! To every part of true
creation has the Lord of Love and Life entrusted *all* salvation from
the misery of hell. And to each one has He allowed the grace to be a
savior to the holy ones especially entrusted to his care. And this he
learns when first he looks upon *one* brother as he looks upon himself
and sees the mirror of himself in him. Thus is the concept of himself
laid by, for nothing stands between his sight and what he looks upon to
judge what he beholds. And in this single vision does he see the face of
Christ and understands he looks on everyone as he beholds this One. For
there is light where darkness was before, and now the veil is lifted
from his sight.

^76^ The veil across the face of Christ, the fear of God and of
salvation, and the love of guilt and death, they all are different names
for just one error-that there is a space between you and your brother,
kept apart by an illusion of yourself which holds him off from you and
you away from him. The sword of judgment is the weapon which you give to
the illusion of yourself that it may fight to keep the space that holds
your brother off unoccupied by love. Yet while you hold this sword, you
must perceive the body as yourself, for you are bound to separation from
the sight of him who holds the mirror to another view of what he is and
thus what *you* must be.

^77^ What is temptation but the *wish* to stay in hell and misery? And
what could this give rise to but an image of yourself that *can* be
miserable and remain in hell and torment? Who has learned to see his
brother *not* as this has saved himself, and thus is he a savior to the
rest. To everyone has God entrusted all, because a partial savior would
be one who is but partly saved. The holy ones whom God has given each of
you to save are everyone you meet or look upon, not knowing who they
are, all those you saw an instant and forgot, and those you knew a long
while since, and those you will yet meet, the unremembered and the not
yet born. For God has given you His Son to save from every concept that
he ever held.

^78^ Yet while you wish to stay in hell, how could you be the savior of
the Son of God? How would you know his holiness while you see him apart
from yours? For holiness is seen through holy eyes that look upon the
innocence within and thus expect to see it everywhere. And so they call
it forth in everyone they look upon that he may be what they expect of
him. This is the savior's vision-that he see his innocence in all he
looks upon and sees his own salvation everywhere. He holds no concept of
himself between his calm and open eyes and what he sees. He *brings* the
light to what he looks upon, that he may see it as it really is.

^79^ Whatever form temptation seems to take, it always but reflects a
wish to be a self which you are not. And from that wish, a concept
rises, teaching that you *are* the thing you wish to be. It will remain
your concept of yourself until the wish that fathered it no longer is
held dear. But while you cherish it, you will behold your brother in the
likeness of the self whose image has the wish begot of *you*. For vision
*can* but represent a wish, because it has no power to create. Yet it
can look with love or look with hate, depending only on the simple
choice of whether you would join with what you see or keep yourself
apart and separate.

^80^ The savior's vision is as innocent of what your brother is as it is
free of any judgment made upon yourself. It sees no past in anyone at
all. And thus it serves a wholly open mind, unclouded by old concepts
and prepared to look on only what the present holds. It cannot judge
because it does not know. And *recognizing* this, it merely asks, "What
is the meaning of what I behold?" Then is the answer given. And the door
held open for the face of Christ to shine upon the one who asks in
innocence to see beyond the veil of old ideas and ancient concepts held
so long and dear *against* the vision of the Christ in you.

^81^ Be vigilant against temptation, then, remembering that it is but a
wish, insane and meaningless, to make yourself a thing which you are
not. And think as well upon the thing that you would be instead. It is a
thing of madness, pain, and death; a thing of treachery and black
despair, of failing dreams and no remaining hope except to die and end
the dream of fear. *This* is temptation, nothing more than this. Can
*this* be difficult to choose *against*? Consider what temptation *is*,
and see the real alternatives you choose between. There *are* but two.
Be not deceived by what appears as many choices. There is hell or
Heaven, and of these you choose but *one*.

^82^ Let not the world's light, given unto you, be hidden from the
world. It *needs* the light, for it is dark indeed, and men despair
because the savior's vision is withheld, and what they see is death.
Their savior stands, unknowing and unknown, beholding them with eyes
unopened. And they cannot see until he looks on them with seeing eyes
and offers them forgiveness with his own. Can you to whom God says,
"Release My Son!" be tempted not to listen when you learn that it is
*you* for whom he asks release? And what but this is what this course
would teach? And what but this is there for you to learn?
:::

[]{#part0036_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**VIII. Choose Once Again**](#part0004.html#level-268) {#part0036_split_007.html#h1-268 .level1a}

^83^ Temptation has one lesson it would teach in all its forms wherever
it occurs. It would persuade the holy Son of God he is a body, born in
what must die, unable to escape its frailty and bound by what it orders
him to feel. It sets the limits on what he can do; its power is the only
strength he has; his grasp cannot exceed its tiny reach. Would you *be*
this if Christ appeared to you in all His glory, asking you but this:

^84^ Choose once again if you would take your place\
among the saviors of the world, or would\
remain in hell and hold your brothers there.

^85^ For He *has* come, and He *is* asking this.

^86^ How do you make the choice? How easily is this explained! You
always choose between your weakness and the strength of Christ in you.
And what you choose is what you think is real. Simply by never using
weakness to direct your actions, you have given it no power. And the
light of Christ in you is given charge of everything you do. For you
have brought your weakness unto Him, and He has given you His strength
instead.

^87^ Trials are but lessons which you failed to learn presented once
again, so where you made a faulty choice before, you now can make a
better one and thus escape all pain which what you chose before has
brought to you. In every difficulty, all distress, and each perplexity
Christ calls to you and gently says, "My brother, choose again." He
would not leave one source of pain unhealed nor any image left to veil
the truth. \[He would remove all misery from you, whom God created
altars unto joy.\] He would not leave you comfortless, alone in dreams
of hell, but would release your minds from everything that hides His
face from you. His holiness is yours because He is the *only* power that
is real in you. His strength is yours because He is the Self that God
created as His *only* Son.

^88^ The images you make can *not* prevail against what God Himself
would have you be. Be never fearful of temptation then, but see it as it
is; another chance to choose again and let Christ's strength prevail in
every circumstance and every place you raised an image of yourself
before. For what appears to hide the face of Christ is powerless before
His majesty and disappears before His holy sight. The saviors of the
world who see like Him are merely those who chose His strength instead
of their own weakness, seen apart from Him. They will redeem the world,
for they are joined in all the power of the Will of God. And what they
will is *only* what He wills.

^89^ Learn then the happy habit of response to all temptation to
perceive yourself as weak and miserable with these words:

^90^ I am as God created me. His Son\
can suffer nothing. And I am His Son.

^91^ Thus is Christ's strength invited to prevail, replacing all your
weakness with the strength that comes from God and that can never fail.
And thus are miracles as natural as fear and agony appeared to be before
the choice for holiness was made. For in that choice are false
distinctions gone, illusory alternatives laid by, and nothing left to
interfere with truth.

^92^ You *are* as God created you, and so is every living thing you look
upon, regardless of the images you see. What you behold as sickness and
as pain, as weakness and as suffering and loss is but temptation to
perceive yourself defenseless and in hell. Yield not to this, and you
will see all pain in every form wherever it occurs but disappear as
mists before the sun. A miracle has come to heal God's Son and close the
door upon his dreams of weakness, opening the way to his salvation and
release. Choose once again what you would have him be, remembering that
every choice you make establishes your own identity as you will see it
and believe it *is.*

^93^ Deny me not the little gift I ask when in exchange I lay before
your feet the peace of God and power to bring this peace to everyone who
wanders in the world uncertain, lonely, and in constant fear. For it is
given you to join with him, and through the Christ in you unveil his
eyes and let him look upon the Christ in him. My brothers in salvation,
do not fail to hear my voice and listen to my words. I ask for nothing
but your *own* release. There is no place for hell within a world whose
loveliness can yet be so intense and so inclusive it is but a step from
there to Heaven. To your tired eyes I bring a vision of a different
world, so new and clean and fresh you will forget the pain and sorrow
that you saw before. Yet this a vision is which you must share with
everyone you see, for otherwise you will behold it not. To give this
gift is how to make it yours. And God ordained in loving kindness that
it *be* for you.

^94^ Let us be glad that we can walk the world and find so many chances
to perceive another situation where God's gift can once again be
recognized as ours! And thus will all the vestiges of hell, the secret
"sins," and hidden hates be gone. And all the loveliness which they
concealed appear like lawns of Heaven to our sight to lift us high above
the thorny roads we travelled on before the Christ appeared. Hear me, my
brothers, hear and join with me. God has ordained I cannot call in vain,
and in His certainty I rest content. For you *will* hear, and you *will*
choose again. And in this choice is everyone made free.

^95^ I thank You, Father, for these holy ones who are my brothers as
they are Your Sons. My faith in them is Yours. I am as sure that they
will come to me as You are sure of what they are and will forever be.
They will accept the gift I offer them because You gave it me on their
behalf. And as I would but do Your holy Will, so will they choose. And I
give thanks for them. Salvation's song will echo through the world with
every choice they make. For we are one in purpose, and the end of hell
is near.

^96^ In joyous welcome is my hand outstretched to every brother who
would join with me in reaching past temptation and who looks with fixed
determination toward the light that shines beyond in perfect constancy.
Give me my own, for they belong to You. And can You fail in what is but
Your Will? I give You thanks for what my brothers are. And as each one
elects to join with me, the song of thanks from earth to Heaven grows
from tiny scattered threads of melody to one inclusive chorus from a
world redeemed from hell and giving thanks to You.

^97^ And now we say "Amen." For Christ has come to dwell in the abode
You set for Him before time was, in calm eternity. The journey closes,
ending at the place where it began. No trace of it remains. Not one
illusion is accorded faith, and not one spot of darkness still remains
to hide the face of Christ from anyone. Thy Will is done, complete and
perfectly, and all creation recognizes You and knows You as the only
Source it has. Clear in Your Likeness does the Light shine forth from
everything that lives and moves in You. For we have reached where all of
us are One, and we are home, where You would have us be.
:::

[]{#part0037.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Workbook For Students**](#part0004.html#section-1) {#part0037.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}
:::

[]{#part0038.html}

::: {.body}
Workbook For Students

[Part I](#part0004.html#part-1)
:::

[]{#part0039_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Introduction**](#part0004.html#intr-1) {#part0039_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ A theoretical foundation such as the text is necessary as a
background to make these exercises meaningful. Yet it is the exercises
which will make the goal possible. An untrained mind can accomplish
nothing. It is the purpose of these exercises to train the mind to think
along the lines which the course sets forth.

^2^ The exercises are very simple. They do not require more than a few
minutes, and it does not matter where or when you do them. They need no
preparation. They are numbered, running from 1 to 365. The training
period is one year. Do not undertake more than one exercise a day.

^3^ The purpose of these exercises is to train the mind to a different
perception of everything in the world. The workbook is divided into two
sections, the first dealing with the undoing of what you see now and the
second with the restoration of sight. It is recommended that each
exercise be repeated several times a day, preferably in a different
place each time and, if possible, in every situation in which you spend
any long period of time. The purpose is to train the mind to generalize
the lessons, so that you will understand that each of them is as
applicable to one situation as it is to another.

^4^ Unless specified to the contrary, the exercise should be practiced
with the eyes open, since the aim is to learn how to see. The only rule
that should be followed throughout is to practice the exercises with
great specificity. Each one applies to every situation in which you find
yourself and to everything you see in it. Each day's exercises are
planned around one central idea, the exercises themselves consisting of
applying that idea to as many specifics as possible. Be sure that you do
not decide that there are some things you see to which the idea for the
day is inapplicable. The aim of the exercises will always be to increase
the application of the idea to everything. This will not require effort.
Only be sure that you make no exceptions in applying the idea.

^5^ Some of the ideas you will find hard to believe, and others will
seem quite startling. It does not matter. You are merely asked to apply
them to what you see. You are not asked to judge them, nor even to
believe them. You are asked only to use them. It is their use which will
give them meaning to you, and show you they are true. Remember only
this-you need not believe them, you need not accept them, and you need
not welcome them. Some of them you may actively resist. None of this
will matter nor decrease their efficacy. But allow yourself to make no
exceptions in applying the ideas the exercises contain. Whatever your
reactions to the ideas may be, use them. Nothing more than this is
required.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 1 Nothing I see in this room \[on this street, from this window, in this place\] means anything**](#part0004.html#level-269) {#part0039_split_001.html#h1-269 .level1}

^1^ Now look slowly around you, and practice applying this idea very
specifically to whatever you see:

*^2^ This table does not mean anything.\
This chair does not mean anything.\
This hand does not mean anything.\
This foot does not mean anything.\
This pen does not mean anything.*

^3^ Then look farther away from your immediate area, and apply the idea
to a wider range:

*^4^ That door does not mean anything.\
That body does not mean anything.\
That lamp does not mean anything.\
That sign does not mean anything.\
That shadow does not mean anything.*

^5^ Notice that these statements are not arranged in any order, and make
no allowance for differences in the kinds of things to which they are
applied. That is the purpose of the exercise. The statement is merely
applied to anything you see. As you practice applying the idea for the
day, use it totally indiscriminately. Do not attempt to apply it to
everything you see, for these exercises should not become ritualistic.
Only be sure that nothing you see is specifically excluded. One thing is
like another as far as the application of the idea is concerned.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 2 I have given everything I see in this room \[on this street, from this window, in this place\] all the meaning that it has for me**](#part0004.html#level-270) {#part0039_split_002.html#h1-270 .level1}

^1^ The exercises with this idea are the same as those for the first
one. Begin with the things that are near you, and apply the idea to
whatever your glance rests on. Then increase the range outward. Turn
your head so that you include whatever is to either side. If possible,
turn around and apply the idea to what was behind you. Remain as
indiscriminate as possible in selecting subjects for its application, do
not concentrate on anything in particular, and do not attempt to include
everything in an area or you will introduce strain. Merely glance easily
and fairly quickly around you, trying to avoid selection by size,
brightness, color, material, or relative importance to you.

^2^ Take the subjects simply as you see them. Try to apply the exercise
with equal ease to a body or a button, a fly or a floor, an arm or an
apple. The sole criterion for applying the idea to anything is merely
that your eyes have lighted on it. Make no attempt to include anything
particular, but be sure that nothing is specifically excluded.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 3 I do not understand anything I see in this room \[on this street, from this window, in this place\]**](#part0004.html#level-271) {#part0039_split_003.html#h1-271 .level1}

^1^ Apply this idea in the same way as the previous ones, without making
distinctions of any kind. Whatever you see becomes a proper subject for
applying the idea. Be sure that you do not question the suitability of
anything for the application of the idea. These are not exercises in
judgment. Anything is suitable if you see it. Some of the things you see
may have emotionally-charged meaning for you. Try to lay such feelings
aside, and merely use these things exactly as you would anything else.

^2^ The point of the exercises is to help you clear your mind of all
past associations, to see things exactly as they appear to you now, and
to realize how little you really understand about them. It is therefore
essential that you keep a perfectly open mind, unhampered by judgment,
in selecting the things to which the idea for the day is to be applied.
For this purpose one thing is like another-equally suitable and
therefore equally useful.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 4 These thoughts do not mean anything. They are like the things I see in this room \[on this street, from this window, in this place\]**](#part0004.html#level-272) {#part0039_split_004.html#h1-272 .level1}

^1^ Unlike the preceding ones, these exercises do not begin with the
idea for the day. In these practice periods, begin with noting the
thoughts that are crossing your mind for about a minute. Then apply the
idea to them. If you are already aware of unhappy thoughts, use them as
subjects for the idea. Do not, however, select only the thoughts you
think are "bad." You will find, if you train yourself to look at your
thoughts, that they represent such a mixture that, in a sense, none of
them can be called "good" or "bad." This is why they do not mean
anything.

^2^ In selecting the subjects for the application of today's idea, the
usual specificity is required. Do not be afraid to use "good" thoughts
as well as "bad." None of them represents your real thoughts, which are
being covered up by them. The "good" ones of which you are aware are but
shadows of what lies beyond, and shadows make sight difficult. The "bad"
ones are blocks to sight and make seeing impossible. You do not want
either.

^3^ This is a major exercise and will be repeated from time to time in
somewhat different form. The aim here is to train you in the first steps
toward the goal of separating the meaningless from the meaningful. It is
a first attempt in the long-range purpose of learning to see the
meaningless as outside you and the meaningful within. It is also the
beginning of training your mind to recognize what is the same and what
is different. In using your thoughts for application of the idea for
today, identify each thought by the central figure or event it contains.
For example:

*^4^ This thought about \_\_\_\_\_ does not mean anything.\
It is like the things I see in this\
room \[or wherever you are\].*

^5^ You can also use the idea for a particular thought which you
recognize as harmful. This practice is useful, but is not a substitute
for the more random procedures to be followed for the exercises. Do not,
however, examine your mind for more than a minute or so. You are too
inexperienced as yet to avoid a tendency to become pointlessly
preoccupied. Further, since these exercises are the first of their kind,
you may find the suspension of judgment in connection with thoughts
particularly difficult. Do not repeat these exercises more than three or
four times during the day. We will return to them later.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 5 I am never upset for the reason I think**](#part0004.html#level-273) {#part0039_split_005.html#h1-273 .level1}

^1^ This idea, like the preceding one, can be used with any person,
situation, or event you think is causing you pain. Apply it specifically
to whatever you believe is the cause of your upset, using the
description of the feeling in whatever term seems accurate to you. The
upset may seem to be fear, worry, depression, anxiety, anger, hatred,
jealousy, or any number of forms, all of which will be perceived as
different. This is not true. However, until you learn that form does not
matter, each form becomes a proper subject for the exercises for the
day. Applying the same idea to each of them separately is the first step
in ultimately recognizing they are all the same.

^2^ When using the idea for today for a specific perceived cause of an
upset in any form, use both the name of the form in which you see the
upset and the cause which you ascribe to it. For example:

*^3^ I am not angry at \_\_\_\_ for the reason I think.\
I am not afraid of \_\_\_\_ for the reason I think.*

^4^ But again, this should not be substituted for practice periods in
which you first search your mind for "sources" of upset in which you
believe and forms of upset which you think result.

^5^ In these exercises, more than in the preceding ones, you may find it
hard to be indiscriminate and to avoid giving greater weight to some
subjects than to others. It might help to precede the exercises with the
statement:

*^6^ There are no small upsets. They are all\
equally disturbing to my peace of mind**.***

^7^ Then examine your mind for whatever is distressing you, regardless
of how much or how little you think it is doing so.

^8^ You may also find yourself less willing to apply today's idea to
some perceived sources of upset than to others. If this occurs, think
first of this:

*^9^ I cannot keep this form of upset and let\
the others go. For the purposes of these\
exercises, then, I will regard them all as the same.*

^10^ Then search your mind for no more than a minute or so, and try to
identify a number of different forms of upset that are disturbing you,
regardless of the relative importance you may give them. Apply the idea
for today to each of them, using the name of both the source of the
upset as you perceive it and of the feelings as you experience it.
Further examples are:

*^11^ I am not worried about \_\_\_\_ for the reason I think.\
I am not depressed about \_\_\_\_ for the reason I think.*

^12^ Three or four times during the day are enough.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 6 I am upset because I see something that is not there**](#part0004.html#level-274) {#part0039_split_006.html#h1-274 .level1}

^1^ The exercises with this idea are very similar to the preceding ones.
Again, it is necessary to name both the form of upset (anger, fear,
worry, depression, and so on) and the perceived source very specifically
for any application of the idea. For example:

*^2^ I am angry at \_\_\_ because I see something that is not there.\
I am worried about \_\_\_ because I see something that is not there.*

^3^Today's idea is useful for application to anything that seems to
upset you and can profitably be used throughout the day for that
purpose. However, the three or four practice periods which are required
should be preceded by a minute or so of mind searching, as before, and
the application of the idea to each upsetting thought uncovered in the
search.

^4^ Again, if you resist applying the idea to some upsetting thoughts
more than to others, remind yourself of the two cautions stated in the
previous lesson:

^5^There are no small upsets. They are all\
equally disturbing to my peace of mind.

^6^And:

*^7^ I cannot keep this form of upset and let\
the others go. For the purposes of these exercises,?then, I will regard
them all as the same.*
:::

[]{#part0039_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 7 I see only the past**](#part0004.html#level-275) {#part0039_split_007.html#h1-275 .level1}

^1^ This idea is particularly difficult to believe at first. Yet it is
the rationale for all of the preceding ones.

^2^ It is the reason why nothing that you see means anything.

^3^ It is the reason why you have given everything you see all the
meaning that it has for you.

^4^ It is the reason why you do not understand anything you see.

^5^ It is the reason why your thoughts do not mean anything and why they
are like the things you see.

^6^ It is the reason why you are never upset for the reason you think.

^7^ It is the reason why you are upset because you see something that is
not there.

^8^ Old ideas about time are very difficult to change because everything
you believe is rooted in time and depends on your not learning these new
ideas about it. Yet that is precisely why you need new ideas about time.
This first time idea is not really so strange as it may sound at first.
Look at a cup, for example.

^9^ Do you see a cup, or are you merely reviewing your past experiences
of picking up a cup, being thirsty, drinking from a cup, feeling the rim
of a cup against your lips, having breakfast, and so on? Are not your
aesthetic reactions to the cup, too, based on past experiences? How else
would you know whether or not this kind of cup will break if you drop
it? What do you know about this cup except what you learned in the past?
You would have no idea what this cup is except for your past learning.
Do you, then, really see it?

^10^ Look about you. This is equally true of whatever you look at.
Acknowledge this by applying the idea for today indiscriminately to
whatever catches your eye. For example:

*^11^ I see only the past in this pencil.\
I see only the past in this shoe.\
I see only the past in this hand.\
I see only the past in that body.\
I see only the past in that face.*

^12^ Do not linger over any one thing in particular, but remember to
omit nothing specifically. Glance briefly at each subject, and then move
on to the next.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 8 My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-276) {#part0039_split_008.html#h1-276 .level1}

^1^ This idea is, of course, the reason why you see only the past. No
one really sees anything. He sees only his thoughts projected outward.
The mind's preoccupation with the past is the cause of the total
misconception about time from which your seeing suffers. Your mind
cannot grasp the present, which is the only time there is. It therefore
cannot understand time and cannot, in fact, understand anything.

^2^ The only wholly true thought one can hold about the past is that it
is not here. To think about it at all is therefore to think about
illusions. Very few minds have realized what is actually entailed in
picturing the past or in anticipating the future. The mind is actually
blank when it does this because it is not really thinking about
anything.

^3^ The purpose of the exercises for today is to begin to train your
mind to recognize when it is not really thinking at all. While
thoughtless "ideas" preoccupy your mind, the truth is blocked.
Recognizing that your mind has been merely blank, rather than believing
that it is filled with real ideas, is the first step to opening the way
to vision.

^4^ The exercises for today should be done with eyes closed. This is
because you actually cannot see anything, and it is easier to recognize
that, no matter how vividly you may picture a thought, you are not
seeing anything. With as little investment as possible, search your mind
for the usual minute or so, merely noting the thoughts you find there.
Name each one by the central figure or theme it contains, and pass on to
the next. Introduce the practice period by saying:

*^5^ I seem to be thinking about \_\_\_\_\_.*

^6^ Then name each of your thoughts specifically. For example:

^7^ I seem to be thinking about \[name of person\],\
about \[name of object\], about \[name of emotion\];

^8^ and so on, concluding at the end of the mind-searching period with:

*^9^ But my mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.*

^10^ This can be done four or five times during the day, unless you find
it irritates you. If you find it trying, three or four times are
sufficient. You might find it helpful, however, to include your
irritation, or any emotion which the idea may induce, in the mind
searching itself.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 9 I see nothing as it is now**](#part0004.html#level-277) {#part0039_split_009.html#h1-277 .level1}

^1^ This idea obviously follows from the two preceding ones. But while
you may be able to accept it intellectually, it is unlikely that it will
mean anything to you as yet. However, understanding is not necessary at
this point. In fact, the recognition that you do not understand is a
prerequisite for undoing your false ideas. These exercises are concerned
with practice, not with understanding. You do not need to practice what
you really understand. It would indeed be circular to aim at
understanding and assume that you have it already.

^2^ It is difficult for the untrained mind to believe that what seems to
be pictured before it is not there. This idea can be quite disturbing
and may meet with active resistance in any number of forms. Yet that
does not preclude applying it. No more than that is required for these
or any other exercises. Each little step will clear a little of the
darkness away, and understanding will finally come to lighten every
corner of the mind which has been cleared of the debris that darkens it.

^3^ These exercises, for which three or four practice periods are
sufficient, involve looking about you and applying the idea for the day
to whatever you see, remembering the need for its indiscriminate
application and the essential rule of excluding nothing. For example:

*^4^ I do not see this typewriter as it is now.\
I do not see this key as it is now.\
I do not see this telephone as it is now.*

^5^ Begin with things that are nearest you, and then extend the range:

*^6^ I do not see that coat rack as it is now.\
I do not see that face as it is now.\
I do not see that door as it is now.*

^7^ It is emphasized again that while complete inclusion should not be
attempted, specific exclusion must be avoided. Be sure you are honest in
making this distinction. You may be tempted to obscure it.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 10 My thoughts do not mean anything**](#part0004.html#level-278) {#part0039_split_010.html#h1-278 .level1}

^1^ This idea applies to all the thoughts of which you are aware or
become aware in the practice periods. The reason the idea is applicable
to all of them is that they are not your real thoughts. We have made
this distinction before and will again. You have no basis for comparison
as yet. When you do, you will have no doubt that what you once believed
were your thoughts did not mean anything.

^2^ This is the second time we have used this kind of idea. The form is
only slightly different. This time the idea is introduced with "My
thoughts" instead of "These thoughts" and no link is made overtly with
the things around you. The emphasis is now on the lack of reality of
what you think you think.

^3^ This aspect of the correction process began with the idea that the
thoughts of which you are aware are meaningless, outside rather than
within, and then stressed their past rather than their present status.
Now we are emphasizing that the presence of these "thoughts" means that
you are not thinking. This is merely another way of repeating our
earlier statement that your mind is really a blank. To recognize this is
to recognize nothingness when you think you see it. As such, it is the
prerequisite for vision.

^4^ Close your eyes for these exercises and introduce them by repeating
the idea for today quite slowly to yourself. Then add:

*^5^ This idea will help to release me from all that I now believe.*

^6^ The exercises consist, as before, in searching your mind for all the
thoughts which are available to you, without selection or judgment. Try
to avoid classification of any kind. In fact, if you find it helpful to
do so, you might imagine that you are watching an oddly assorted
procession going by, which has little if any personal meaning to you. As
each one crosses your mind, say:

*^7^ This thought about \_\_\_\_\_ does not mean anything.\
That thought about \_\_\_\_\_ does not mean anything.*

^8^ Today's idea can obviously serve for any thought that distresses you
at any time. In addition, five practice periods are recommended, each
involving no more than a minute or so of mind searching. It is not
recommended that this time period be extended, and it should be reduced
to half a minute or even less if you experience discomfort. Remember,
however, to repeat the idea slowly before applying it specifically, and
also to add:

*^9^ This idea will help to release me from all\
that I now believe.*
:::

[]{#part0039_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 11 My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world**](#part0004.html#level-279) {#part0039_split_011.html#h1-279 .level1}

^1^ This is the first idea we have had which is related to a major phase
of the correction process-the reversal of the thinking of the world. It
seems as if the world determines what you perceive. Today's idea
introduces the concept that your thoughts determine the world you see.
Be glad indeed to practice the idea in this initial form, for in this
idea is your release made sure. The key to forgiveness lies in it.

^2^ The practice periods for today's idea are to be undertaken somewhat
differently from the previous ones. Begin with eyes closed, and repeat
the idea slowly to yourself. Then open your eyes and look about, near or
far, up or down-anywhere. During the minute or so to be spent in using
the idea, merely repeat it to yourself, being sure to do so without
haste and with no sense of urgency or effort.

^3^ To do these exercises for maximum benefit, the eyes should move from
one thing to another fairly rapidly since they should not linger on
anything in particular. The words, however, should be used in an
unhurried, even leisurely fashion. The introduction to this idea should
be practiced as casually as possible. It contains the foundation for the
peace, relaxation, and freedom from worry that we are trying to achieve.
On concluding the exercises, close your eyes and repeat the idea once
more, slowly, to yourself.

^4^ Three practice periods today will probably be sufficient. However,
if there is little or no uneasiness and an inclination to do more, as
many as five may be undertaken. More than this is not recommended.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 12 I am upset because I see a meaningless world**](#part0004.html#level-280) {#part0039_split_012.html#h1-280 .level1}

^1^ The importance of this idea lies in the fact that it contains a
correction for a major perceptual distortion. You think that what upsets
you is a frightening world, or a sad world, or a violent world, or an
insane world. All these attributes are given it by you. The world is
meaningless in itself.

^2^ These exercises are done with eyes open. Look around you, this time
quite slowly. Try to pace yourself so that the slow shifting of your
glance from one thing to another involves a fairly constant time
interval. Do not allow the time of the shift to become markedly longer
or shorter, but try, instead, to keep a measured, even tempo throughout.
What you see does not matter. You teach yourself this as you give
whatever your glance rests on equal attention and equal time. This is a
beginning step in learning to give them all equal value.

^3^ As you look about you, say to yourself:

*^4^ I think I see a fearful world, a dangerous world, a hostile\
world, a sad world, a wicked world, a crazy world;*

^5^ and so on, using whatever descriptive terms happen to occur to you.
If terms which seem positive rather than negative occur to you, include
them. For example, you might think of a "good world," or a "satisfying
world." If such terms occur to you, use them along with the rest. You
may not yet understand why these "nice" adjectives belong in these
exercises, but remember that a "good world" implies a "bad" one, and a
"satisfying world" implies an "unsatisfying" one. All terms which cross
your mind are suitable subjects for today's exercises. Their seeming
quality does not matter.

^6^ Be sure that you do not alter the time intervals between applying
today's idea to what you think is pleasant and what you think is
unpleasant. For the purposes of these exercises, there is no difference
between them. At the end of the practice period, add:

*^7^ But I am upset because I see a meaningless world.*

^8^ What is meaningless is neither good nor bad. Why, then, should a
meaningless world upset you? If you could accept the world as
meaningless and let the truth be written upon it for you, it would make
you indescribably happy. But because it is meaningless, you are impelled
to write upon it what you would have it be. It is this you see in it. It
is this that is meaningless in truth. Beneath your words is written the
Word of God. The truth upsets you now, but when your words have been
erased, you will see His. That is the ultimate purpose of these
exercises.

^9^ Three or four times are enough for practicing the idea for today.
Nor should the practice periods exceed a minute. You may find even this
too long. Terminate the exercises whenever you experience a sense of
strain.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 13 A meaningless world engenders fear**](#part0004.html#level-281) {#part0039_split_013.html#h1-281 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea is really another form of the preceding one, except
that it is more specific as to the emotion aroused. Actually, a
meaningless world is impossible. Nothing without meaning exists.
However, it does not follow that you will not think you perceive
something that has no meaning. On the contrary, you will be particularly
likely to think you do perceive it.

^2^ Recognition of meaninglessness arouses intense anxiety in all the
separated ones. It represents a situation in which God and the ego
"challenge" each other as to whose meaning is to be written in the empty
space which meaninglessness provides. The ego rushes in frantically to
establish its own "ideas" there, fearful that the void may otherwise be
used to demonstrate its own unreality. And on this alone it is correct.

^3^ It is essential, therefore, that you learn to recognize the
meaningless and accept it without fear. If you are fearful, it is
certain that you will endow the world with attributes which it does not
possess and crowd it with images that do not exist. To the ego,
illusions are safety devices, as they must also be to you who equate
yourself with the ego.

^4^ The exercises for today, which should be done about three or four
times for not more than a minute or so at most each time, are to be
practiced in a somewhat different way from the preceding ones. With eyes
closed, repeat today's idea to yourself. Then open your eyes and look
about you slowly, saying:

*^5^ I am looking at a meaningless world.*

^6^ Repeat this statement to yourself as you look about. Then close your
eyes and conclude with:

*^7^ A meaningless world engenders fear because\
I think I am in competition with God.*

^8^ You may find it difficult to avoid resistance in one form or another
to this concluding statement. Whatever form such resistance may take,
remind yourself that you are really afraid of such a thought because of
the "vengeance" of the "enemy." You are not expected to believe the
statement at this point and will probably try to dismiss it as
preposterous. Note carefully, however, any signs of overt or covert fear
which it may arouse. This is our first attempt at stating an explicit
cause and effect relationship of a kind which you are very inexperienced
in recognizing. Do not dwell on the concluding statement, and try not
even to think of it except during the exercise periods. That will
suffice at present.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 14 God did not create a meaningless world**](#part0004.html#level-282) {#part0039_split_014.html#h1-282 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is, of course, the reason why a meaningless world
is impossible. What God did not create does not exist. And everything
that does exist exists as He created it. The world you see has nothing
to do with reality. It is of your own making, and it does not exist.

^2^ The exercises for today are to be practiced with eyes closed
throughout. The mind searching period should be short, a minute at most.
Do not have more than three practice periods with today's idea unless
you find them comfortable. If you do, it will be because you really
understand what they are for.

^3^ The idea for today is another step in learning to let go the
thoughts which you have written on the world, and see the Word of God in
their place. The early steps in this exchange, which can truly be called
salvation, can be quite difficult and even quite painful. Some of them
will lead you directly into fear. You will not be left there. You will
go far beyond it. Our direction is toward perfect safety and perfect
peace.

^4^ With eyes closed, think of all the horrors in the world that cross
your mind. Name each one as it occurs to you, and then deny its reality.
God did not create it, and so it is not real. Say, for example:

*^5^ God did not create that war, and so it is not real.\
God did not create that airplane crash, and so it is not real.\
God did not create that disaster \[specify\], and so it is not real.*

^6^ Suitable subjects for the application of today's idea also include
anything you are afraid might happen to you or to anyone about whom you
are concerned. In each case, name the "disaster" quite specifically. Do
not use general terms. For example, do not say, "God did not create
illness," but, "God did not create cancer," or heart attacks, or
whatever may arouse fear in you.

^7^ This is your personal repertory of horrors at which you are looking.
These things are part of the world you see. Some of them are shared
illusions, and others are part of your personal hell. It does not
matter. What God did not create can only be in your own mind apart from
His. Therefore, it has no meaning. In recognition of this fact, conclude
the practice periods by repeating today's idea:

*^8^ God did not create a meaningless world.*

^9^ The idea for today can, of course, be applied to anything that
disturbs you during the day, aside from the practice periods. Be very
specific in applying it. Say:

*^10^ God did not create a meaningless world.?He did not create
\[specify the situation\
which is disturbing you\], and so it is not real.*
:::

[]{#part0039_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 15 My thoughts are images which I have made**](#part0004.html#level-283) {#part0039_split_015.html#h1-283 .level1}

^1^ It is because the thoughts you think you think appear as images that
you do not recognize them as nothing. You think you think them, and so
you think you see them. This is how your "seeing" was made. This is the
function you have given your body's eyes. It is not seeing. It is
image-making. It takes the place of seeing, replacing vision with
illusions.

^2^ This introductory idea to the process of image-making which you call
seeing will not have much meaning for you. You will begin to understand
it when you have seen little edges of light around the same familiar
objects which you see now. That is the beginning of real vision. You can
be certain that real vision will come quickly when this has occurred.

^3^ As we go along, you may have many "light episodes." They may take
many different forms, some of them quite unexpected. Do not be afraid of
them. They are signs that you are opening your eyes at last. They will
not persist, because they merely symbolize true perception, and they are
not related to knowledge. These exercises will not reveal knowledge to
you. But they will prepare the way to it.

^4^ In practicing the idea for today, repeat it first to yourself, and
then apply it to whatever you see around you, using its name and letting
your eyes rest on it as you say:

*^5^ This \_\_\_\_\_ is an image which I have made.\
That \_\_\_\_\_ is an image which I havemade.*

^6^ It is not necessary to include a large number of specific subjects
for the application of today's idea. It is necessary, however, to
continue to look at each subject while you repeat the idea to yourself.
The idea should be repeated quite slowly each time.

^7^ Although you will obviously not be able to apply the idea to very
many things during the minute or so of practice that is recommended, try
to make the selection as random as possible. Less than a minute will do
for the practice periods, if you begin to feel uneasy. Do not have more
than three application periods for today's idea unless you feel
completely comfortable with it, and do not exceed four.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 16 I have no neutral thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-284) {#part0039_split_016.html#h1-284 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is a beginning step in dispelling the belief that
your thoughts have no effect. Everything you see is the result of your
thoughts. There is no exception to this fact. Thoughts are not big or
little, powerful or weak. They are merely true or false. Those which are
true create their own likeness. Those which are false make theirs.

^2^ There is no more self-contradictory concept than that of "idle
thoughts." What gives rise to the perception of a whole world can hardly
be called idle. Every thought you have contributes to truth or to
illusion; either it extends the truth or it multiplies illusions. You
can indeed multiply nothing, but you will not extend it by doing so.

^3^ In addition to never being idle, salvation requires that you
recognize that every thought you have brings either peace or war, either
love or fear. A neutral result is impossible because a neutral thought
is impossible. There is such a temptation to dismiss fear thoughts as
unimportant, trivial, and not worth bothering about that it is essential
you recognize them all as equally destructive but equally unreal. We
will practice this idea in many forms before you really understand it.

^4^ In applying the idea for today, search your mind for a minute or so,
with eyes closed, and actively seek not to overlook any "little" thought
which tends to elude the search. This is quite difficult until you get
used to it. You will find that it is still hard for you not to make
artificial distinctions. Every thought that occurs to you, regardless of
the quality which you assign to it, is a suitable subject for applying
today's idea.

^5^ In the practice periods, first repeat the idea, and then as each one
crosses your mind, hold it in awareness while you tell yourself:

*^6^ This thought about \_\_\_\_\_ is not a neutral thought.\
That thought about \_\_\_\_\_ is not a neutral thought.*

^7^ As usual, use today's idea whenever you are aware of a particular
thought which arouses uneasiness. The following form is suggested for
this purpose:

*^8^ This thought about \_\_\_\_\_ is not a neutral thought,\
because I have no neutral thoughts.*

^9^ Four or five practice periods are recommended if you find them
relatively effortless. If strain is experienced, three will be enough.
The length of the exercise period should also be reduced if there is
discomfort.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 17 I see no neutral things**](#part0004.html#level-285) {#part0039_split_017.html#h1-285 .level1}

^1^ This idea is another step in the direction of identifying cause and
effect as it really operates. You see no neutral things because you have
no neutral thoughts. It is always the thought that comes first, despite
the temptation to believe that it is really the other way around. This
is not the way the world thinks, but you must learn that it is the way
you think. If it were not so, perception would have no cause and would
itself be the cause of reality. In view of its highly variable nature,
this is hardly likely.

^2^ In applying today's idea, say to yourself, with eyes open:

*^3^ I see no neutral things because I have no neutral thoughts.*

^4^ Then look about you, resting your glance on each thing that catches
your eye long enough to say:

*^5^ I do not see a neutral \_\_\_\_\_, because my thoughts\
about \_\_\_\_\_ are not neutral.*

^6^ For example, you might say:

*^7^ I do not see a neutral wall, because my thoughts\
about walls are not neutral.\
I do not see a neutral body, because my thoughts\
about bodies are not neutral.*

^8^ As usual, it is essential to make no distinction between what you
believe to be animate or inanimate, pleasant or unpleasant. Regardless
of what you may believe, you do not see anything which is really alive
and really joyous. That is because you are unaware as yet of any
thoughts which are really true and therefore really happy.

^9^ Three or four specific practice periods are recommended and no less
than three are required for maximum benefit even if you experience
resistance. However, if you do, the length of the practice period may be
reduced to less than the minute or so which is otherwise recommended.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 18 I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing**](#part0004.html#level-286) {#part0039_split_018.html#h1-286 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is another step in learning that the thoughts
which give rise to what you see are never neutral or unimportant. It
also emphasizes the idea that minds are joined, which will be given
increasing stress later.

^2^ Today's idea does not refer to what you see as much as to how you
see it. Therefore, the exercises for today will emphasize this aspect of
your perception. The three or four practice periods which are
recommended should be done as follows:

^3^ Selecting subjects for the application of the idea randomly, look at
each one long enough to say:

*^4^ I am not alone in experiencing the effects of how I see \_\_\_.*

^5^ Conclude the practice period by repeating the more general
statement:

*^6^ I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.*

^7^ A minute or so or even less will be sufficient.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 19 I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-287) {#part0039_split_019.html#h1-287 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is obviously the reason why your seeing does not
affect you alone. You will notice that at times the ideas related to
thinking precede those related to perceiving, while at other times the
order is reversed. The reason is that the order does not actually
matter. Thinking and its results are really simultaneous, for cause and
effect are never separate.

^2^ Today we are again emphasizing the fact that minds are joined. This
is rarely a wholly welcome idea at first, since it seems to carry with
it an enormous sense of responsibility and may even be regarded as an
"invasion of privacy." Yet it is a fact that there are no private
thoughts. Despite your initial resistance to this idea, you will yet
understand that it must be true if salvation is possible at all. And
salvation must be possible because it is the Will of God.

^3^ The minute or so of mind searching which today's exercises require
are to be undertaken with eyes closed. The idea is to be repeated first,
and then the mind should be carefully searched for the thoughts it
contains at that time. As you consider each one, name it in terms of the
central person or theme it contains and, holding it in your mind as you
do so, say:

*^4^ I am not alone in experiencing the effects of\
this thought about \_\_\_.*

^5^ The requirement of as much indiscriminateness as possible in
selecting subjects for the practice period should be quite familiar to
you by now and will no longer be repeated each day, although it will
occasionally be included as a reminder. Do not forget, however, that
random selection of subjects for all practice periods remains essential
throughout. Lack of order in this connection will ultimately make the
recognition of lack of order in miracles meaningful to you.

^6^ Apart from the "as needed" application of today's idea, at least
three practice periods are required, shortening the length of time
involved if necessary. Do not attempt more than four.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 20 I am determined to see**](#part0004.html#level-288) {#part0039_split_020.html#h1-288 .level1}

^1^ We have been quite casual about our practice periods thus far. There
has been virtually no attempt to direct the time for undertaking them,
minimal effort has been required, and not even active cooperation and
interest have been asked. This casual approach has been intentional and
very carefully planned. We have not lost sight of the crucial importance
of the reversal of your thinking. The salvation of the world depends on
it. Yet you will not see if you regard yourself as being coerced and if
you give in to resentment and opposition.

^2^ This is our first attempt to introduce structure. Do not misconstrue
it as an effort to exert force or pressure. You want salvation. You want
to be happy. You want peace. You do not have them now because your mind
is totally undisciplined, and you cannot distinguish between joy and
sorrow, pleasure and pain, love and fear. You are now learning how to
tell them apart. And great indeed will be your reward.

^3^ Your decision to see is all that vision requires. What you want is
yours. Do not mistake the little effort that is asked of you for a sign
that our goal is of little worth. Can the salvation of the world be a
trivial purpose? And can the world be saved if you are not? God has one
Son, and he is the resurrection and the life. His will is done because
all power is given him in Heaven and on earth. In your determination to
see is vision given you.

^4^ The exercises for today consist in reminding yourselves throughout
the day that you want to see. Today's idea also tacitly implies the
recognition that you do not see now. Therefore, as you repeat the idea,
you are stating that you are determined to change your present state for
a better one, and one you really want.

^5^ Repeat today's idea slowly and positively at least twice an hour
today, attempting to do so every half hour. Do not be distressed if you
forget to do so, but make a real effort to remember. The extra
repetitions should be applied to any situation, person, or event which
upsets you. You can see them differently, and you will. What you desire,
you will see. Such is the real law of cause and effect as it operates in
the world.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 21 I am determined to see things differently**](#part0004.html#level-289) {#part0039_split_021.html#h1-289 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is obviously a continuation and extension of the
preceding one. This time, however, specific mind searching periods are
necessary in addition to applying the idea to particular situations as
they arise. Five practice periods are urged, allowing a full minute for
each.

^2^ In the practice periods, begin by repeating the idea to yourself.
Then close your eyes and search your mind carefully for situations past,
present or anticipated, which arouse anger in you. The anger may take
the form of any reaction ranging from mild irritation to rage. The
degree of the emotion you experience does not matter. You will become
increasingly aware that a slight twinge of annoyance is nothing but a
veil drawn over intense fury.

^3^ Try, therefore, not to let the "little" thoughts of anger escape you
in the practice periods. Remember that you do not really recognize what
arouses anger in you, and nothing that you believe in this connection
means anything. You will probably be tempted to dwell more on some
situations than on others on the fallacious grounds that they are more
"obvious." This is not so. It is merely an example of the belief that
some forms of attack are more justified than others.

^4^ As you search your mind for all the forms in which attack thoughts
present themselves, hold each one in mind and tell yourself:

*^5^ I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[name of person\] differently.\
I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[specify the situation\]
differently.*

^6^ Try to be as specific as possible. You may, for example, focus your
anger on a particular attribute of a particular person, believing that
the anger is limited to this aspect. If your perception of the person is
suffering from this form of distortion, say:

*^7^ I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[specify the\
attribute\] in \_\_\_\_\_ \[name of person\] differently.*
:::

[]{#part0039_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 22 What I see is a form of vengeance**](#part0004.html#level-290) {#part0039_split_022.html#h1-290 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea accurately describes the way anyone who holds attack
thoughts in his mind must see the world. Having projected his anger onto
the world, he sees vengeance about to strike at him. His own attack is
thus perceived as self defense. This becomes an increasingly vicious
circle until he is willing to change how he sees. Otherwise, thoughts of
attack and counter-attack will preoccupy him and people his entire
world. What peace of mind is possible to him then?

^2^ It is from this savage fantasy that you want to escape. Is it not
joyous news to hear that it is not real? Is it not a happy discovery to
find that you can escape? You made what you would destroy-everything
that you hate and would attack and kill. All that you fear does not
exist.

^3^ Look at the world about you at least five times today, for at least
a minute each time. As your eyes move slowly from one object to another,
from one body to another, say to yourself:

*^4^ I see only the perishable.\
I see nothing that will last.\
What I see is not real.\
What I see is a form of vengeance.*

^5^ At the end of each practice period, ask yourself:

*^6^ Is this the world I really want to see?*

^7^ The answer is surely obvious.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 23 I can escape from the world I see by giving up attack thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-291) {#part0039_split_023.html#h1-291 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today contains the only way out of fear that will ever
succeed. Nothing else will work; everything else is meaningless. But
this way cannot fail. Every thought you have makes up some segment of
the world you see. It is with your thoughts, then, that we must work if
your perception of the world is to be changed.

^2^ If the cause of the world you see is attack thoughts, you must learn
that it is these thoughts which you do not want. There is no point in
lamenting the world. There is no point in trying to change the world. It
is incapable of change because it is merely an effect. But there is
indeed a point in changing your thoughts about the world. Here you are
changing the cause. The effects will change automatically.

^3^ The world you see is a vengeful world, and everything in it is a
symbol of vengeance. Each of your perceptions of "external reality" is a
pictorial representation of your own attack thoughts. One can well ask
if this can be called seeing. Is not fantasy a better word for such a
process and hallucination a more appropriate term for the result?

^4^ You see the world which you have made, but you do not see yourself
as the image-maker. You cannot be saved from the world, but you can
escape from its cause. This is what salvation means, for where is the
world you see when its cause is gone? Vision already holds a replacement
for everything you think you see now. Loveliness can light your images
and so transform them that you will love them even though they were made
of hate. For you will not be making them alone.

^5^ The idea for today introduces the thought that you are not trapped
in the world you see, because its cause can be changed. This change
requires, first, that the cause be identified and then let go, so that
it can be replaced. The first two steps in this process require your
cooperation. The final one does not. Your images have already been
replaced. By taking the first two steps, you will see that this is so.

^6^ Besides using it throughout the day as the need arises, five
practice periods are required in applying today's idea. As you look
about you, repeat the idea slowly to yourself and then close your eyes
and devote about a minute to searching your mind for as many attack
thoughts as occur to you. As each one crosses your mind say:

*^7^ I can escape from the world by giving up\
attack thoughts about \_\_\_\_\_.*

^8^ Hold each attack thought in mind as you say this, and then dismiss
that thought and go on to the next.

^9^ In the practice periods, be sure to include both your thoughts of
attacking and of being attacked. Their effects are exactly the same
because they are exactly the same. You do not yet recognize this, and
you are asked at this time only to treat them as the same in today's
practice periods. We are still at the stage of identifying the cause of
the world you see. When you finally realize that thoughts of attack and
of being attacked are not different, you will be ready to let the cause
go.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 24 I do not perceive my own best interests**](#part0004.html#level-292) {#part0039_split_024.html#h1-292 .level1}

^1^ In no situation which arises do you realize the outcome that would
make you happy. Therefore you have no guide to appropriate action, and
no way of judging the results. What you do is determined by your
perception of the situation, and that perception is wrong. It is
inevitable, then, that you will not serve your own best interests. Yet
they are your only goal in any situation which is correctly perceived.
Otherwise, you will not recognize what they are.

^2^ If you realized that you do not perceive your own best interests,
you could be taught what they are. But in the presence of your
conviction that you do know what they are, you cannot learn. The idea
for today is a step toward opening your mind so that learning can begin.

^3^ The exercises for today require much more honesty than you are
accustomed to using. A few subjects, honestly and carefully considered
in each of the five practice periods which should be undertaken today,
will be more helpful than a more cursory examination of a large number.
Two minutes are suggested for each of the mind searching periods which
the exercises involve.

^4^ The practice periods begin with repeating today's idea, followed by
searching the mind with closed eyes for unresolved situations about
which you are currently concerned. The emphasis should be on uncovering
the outcome you want. You will quickly realize that you have a number of
goals in mind as part of the desired outcome and also that these goals
are on different levels and often conflict.

^5^ Name each situation that occurs to you, and enumerate carefully as
many goals as possible that you would like to be met in its resolution.
The form of each application should be roughly as follows:

*^6^ In the situation involving \_\_\_\_\_, I would\
like \_\_\_\_\_ to happen, and \_\_\_\_\_ to happen,*

^7^ and so on. Try to cover as many different kinds of outcome as may
honestly occur to you, even if some of them do not appear to you to be
directly related to the situation or even to be inherent in it at all.

^8^ If these exercises are done properly, you will quickly recognize
that you are making a large number of demands of the situation which
have nothing to do with it. You will also recognize that many of your
goals are contradictory, that you have no unified outcome in mind, and
that you must experience disappointment in connection with some of your
goals however the situation turns out.

^9^ After covering the list of as many hoped-for goals as possible for
each unresolved situation that crosses your mind, say to yourself:

*^10^ I do not perceive my own best interests in this situation,*

^11^ and go on to the next.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 25 I do not know what anything is for**](#part0004.html#level-293) {#part0039_split_025.html#h1-293 .level1}

^1^ Purpose is meaning. Today's idea explains why nothing you see means
anything. You do not know what it is for. Therefore it is meaningless to
you. Everything is for your own best interests. That is what it is for;
that is its purpose; that is what it means. It is in recognizing this
that your goals become unified. It is in recognizing this that what you
see is given meaning.

^2^ You perceive the world and everything in it as meaningful in terms
of ego goals. These goals have nothing to do with your own best
interests because the ego is not you. This false identification makes
you incapable of understanding what anything is for. As a result, you
are bound to misuse it. When you believe this, you will try to withdraw
the goals you have assigned to the world instead of attempting to
reinforce them.

^3^ Another way of describing the goals you now perceive as valuable is
to say that they are all concerned with "personal" interests. Since you
have no personal interests, your goals are really concerned with
nothing. In cherishing them, therefore, you have no goals at all. And
thus you do not know what anything is for.

^4^ Before you can make any sense out of the exercises for today, one
more thought is necessary. At the most superficial levels, you do
recognize purpose. Yet purpose cannot be understood at these levels. For
example, you do understand that a telephone is for the purpose of
talking to someone who is not physically in your immediate vicinity.
What you do not understand is what you want to reach him for. And it is
this that makes your contact with him meaningful or not.

^5^ It is crucial to your learning to be willing to give up the goals
you have established for everything. The recognition that they are
meaningless, rather than "good" or "bad," is the only way to accomplish
this. The idea for today is a step in this direction.

^6^ Six practice periods, each of two minutes duration, are required.
Each practice period should begin with a slow repetition of the idea for
today followed by looking about you and letting your glance rest on
whatever happens to catch your eye, near or far, "important" or
"unimportant," "human" or "unhuman." With your eyes resting on each
subject you so select, say, for example:

*^7^ I do not know what this chair is for.\
I do not know what this pencil is for.\
I do not know what this hand is for.*

^8^ Say this quite slowly, without shifting your eyes until you have
completed the statement. Then move on to the next subject, and apply
today's idea as before.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 26 My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability**](#part0004.html#level-294) {#part0039_split_026.html#h1-294 .level1}

^1^ It is surely obvious that if you can be attacked, you are not
invulnerable. You see attack as a real threat. That is because you
believe that you can really attack. And what would have effects through
you must also have effects on you. It is this law that will ultimately
save you. But you are misusing it now. You must therefore learn how it
can be used for your own best interests rather than against them.

^2^ Because your attack thoughts will be projected, you will fear
attack. And if you fear attack, you must believe that you are not
invulnerable. Attack thoughts therefore make you vulnerable in your own
mind, which is where the attack thoughts are. Attack thoughts and
invulnerability cannot be accepted together. They contradict each other.

^3^ The idea for today introduces the thought that you always attack
yourself. If attack thoughts must entail the belief that you are
vulnerable, their effect is to weaken you in your own eyes. Thus they
have attacked your perception of yourself. And because you believe in
them, you can no longer believe in yourself. A false image of yourself
has come to take the place of what you are.

^4^ Practice with today's idea will help you to understand that
vulnerability or invulnerability is the result of your own thoughts.
Nothing except your thoughts can attack you. Nothing except your
thoughts can make you think you are vulnerable. And nothing except your
thoughts can prove to you this is not so.

^5^ Six practice periods are required in applying today's idea. A full
two minutes should be attempted for each of them, although the time may
be reduced to a minute if the discomfort is too great. Do not reduce it
further.

^6^ The practice period should begin with repeating the idea for today,
then closing your eyes and reviewing the unresolved situations whose
outcomes are causing you concern. The concern may take the form of
depression, worry, anger, a sense of imposition, fear, foreboding, or
preoccupation. Any problem as yet unsettled which tends to recur in your
thoughts during the day is a suitable subject. You will not be able to
use very many for any one practice period, because a longer time than
usual should be spent with each one. Today's idea should be applied as
follows:

^7^ First, name the situation:

^8^ I am concerned about \_\_\_\_\_\_.

^9^ Then go over every possible outcome which has occurred to you in
that connection and which has caused you concern, referring to each one
quite specifically, saying:

^10^ I am afraid \_\_\_\_\_\_ will happen.

^11^ If you are doing the exercises properly, you should have some five
or six distressing possibilities available for each situation you use
and quite possibly more. It is much more helpful to cover a few
situations thoroughly than to touch on a larger number.

^12^ As the list of anticipated outcomes for each situation continues,
you will probably find some of them, especially those which occur to you
toward the end, less acceptable to you. Try, however, to treat them all
alike to whatever extent you can.

^13^ After you have named each outcome of which you are afraid, tell
yourself:

^14^ That thought is an attack upon myself.

^15^ Conclude each practice period by repeating today's idea once more.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 27 Above all else I want to see**](#part0004.html#level-295) {#part0039_split_027.html#h1-295 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea expresses something stronger than mere determination.
It gives vision priority among your desires. You may feel hesitant about
using the idea on the ground that you are not sure you really mean it.
This does not matter. The purpose of today's exercises is to bring the
time when the idea will be wholly true a little nearer.

^2^ There may be a great temptation to believe that some sort of
sacrifice is being asked of you when you say you want to see above all
else. If you become uneasy about the lack of reservation involved, add:

^3^ Vision has no cost to anyone.

^4^ If fear of loss still persists, add further:

^5^ It can only bless.

^6^ The idea for today needs many repetitions for maximum benefit. It
should be used at least every half hour, and more often if possible. You
might try for every 15 or 20 minutes. It is recommended that you set a
definite time interval for using the idea when you wake or shortly
afterwards and attempt to adhere to it throughout the day. It will not
be difficult to do this, even if you are engaged in conversation or
otherwise occupied at the time. You can still repeat one short sentence
to yourself without disturbing anything that is going on.

^7^ The real question is how often will you remember? How much do you
want today's idea to be true? Answer one of these questions, and you
have answered the other. You will probably miss several applications and
perhaps quite a number. Do not be disturbed by this, but do try to keep
on your schedule from then on. If only once during the day you feel that
you were perfectly sincere while you were repeating today's idea, you
can be sure that you have saved yourself many years of effort.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 28 Above all else, I want to see things differently**](#part0004.html#level-296) {#part0039_split_028.html#h1-296 .level1}

^1^ Today we are really giving specific application to the idea for
yesterday. In these practice periods, you will be making a series of
definite commitments. The question of whether you will keep them in the
future is not our concern here. If you are willing at least to make them
now, you have started on the way to keeping them. And we are still at
the beginning.

^2^ You may wonder why it is important to say, for example, "Above all
else I want to see this table differently." In itself it is not
important at all. Yet what is by itself? And what does "in itself" mean?
You see a lot of separate things about you, which really means you are
not seeing at all. You either see or not. When you have seen one thing
differently, you will see all things differently. The light you will see
in any one of them is the same light you will see in them all.

^3^ When you say, "Above all else I want to see this table differently,"
you are making a commitment to withdraw your preconceived ideas about
the table and open your mind to what it is and what it is for. You are
not defining it in past terms. You are asking what it is, rather than
telling it what it is. You are not binding its meaning to your tiny
experience of tables, nor are you limiting its purpose to your little
personal thoughts.

^4^ You will not question what we have already defined. And the purpose
of these exercises is to ask questions and receive the answers. In
saying, "Above all else I want to see this table differently," you are
committing yourself to seeing. It is not an exclusive commitment. It is
a commitment which applies to the table just as much as to anything
else, neither more nor less.

^5^ You could, in fact, gain vision from just that table if you could
withdraw all your own ideas from it and look upon it with a completely
open mind. It has something to show you-something beautiful and clean
and of infinite value, full of happiness and hope. Hidden under all your
ideas about it is its real purpose, the purpose it shares with all the
universe.

^6^ In using the table as a subject for applying the idea for today, you
are therefore really asking to see the purpose of the universe. You will
be making this same request of each subject which you use in the
practice periods. And you are making a commitment to each of them to let
their purpose be revealed to you instead of placing your own judgment
upon them.

^7^ We will have six two minute practice periods today in which the idea
for the day is stated first and then applied to whatever you see in
looking about you. Not only should the subjects be chosen randomly, but
each one should be accorded equal sincerity as today's idea is applied
to it in an attempt to acknowledge the equal value of them all in their
contribution to your seeing.

^8^ As usual, the applications should include the name of the subject
which your eyes happen to light on, and you should rest your eyes on it
while saying:

^9^ Above all else, I want to see this \_\_\_\_\_\_ differently.

^10^ Each application should be made quite slowly and as thoughtfully as
possible. There is no hurry.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 29 God is in everything I see**](#part0004.html#level-297) {#part0039_split_029.html#h1-297 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today explains why you can see all purpose in anything.
It explains why nothing is separate, by itself or in itself. And it
explains why nothing you see means anything. In fact, it explains every
idea we have used thus far and all subsequent ones as well. Today's idea
is the whole basis for vision.

^2^ You will probably find this idea very difficult to grasp at this
point. You may find it silly, irreverent, senseless, funny, and even
objectionable. Certainly God is not in a table, for example, as you see
it. Yet we emphasized yesterday that a table shares the purpose of the
universe. And what shares the purpose of the universe shares the purpose
of its Creator.

^3^ Try then today to begin to learn how to look on all things with
love, appreciation, and open-mindedness. You do not see them now. Would
you know what is in them? Nothing is as it appears to you. Its holy
purpose stands beyond your little range. When vision has shown you the
holiness that lights up the world, you will understand today's idea
perfectly. And you will not understand how you could ever have found it
difficult.

^4^ Our six two-minute practice periods for today should follow a now
familiar pattern: begin with repeating the idea to yourself, and then
apply it to randomly chosen subjects about you, naming each one
specifically. Try to avoid the tendency toward self-directed selection,
which may be particularly tempting in connection with today's idea
because of its wholly alien nature. Remember that any order you impose
is equally alien to reality.

^5^ Your list of subjects should therefore be as free of self-selection
as possible. For example, a suitable list might include:

^6^ God is in this coat hanger.\
God is in this magazine.\
God is in this finger.\
God is in this lamp.\
God is in that body.\
God is in that door.\
God is in that waste basket.

^7^ In addition to the assigned practice periods, repeat the idea for
today at least once an hour, looking slowly about you as you say the
words unhurriedly to yourself. At least once or twice you should
experience a sense of restfulness as you do this.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 30 God is in everything I see, because God is in my mind**](#part0004.html#level-298) {#part0039_split_030.html#h1-298 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is the springboard for vision. From this idea
will the world open up before you, and you will look upon it and see in
it what you have never seen before. Nor will what you saw before be even
faintly visible to you.

^2^ Today we are trying to use the new kind of projection. We are not
attempting to get rid of what we do not like by seeing it outside.
Instead, we are trying to see in the world what is in our minds, and
what we want to recognize is there. Thus we are trying to join with what
we see, rather than keeping it apart from us. That is the fundamental
difference between vision and the way you see.

^3^ Today's idea should be applied as often as possible throughout the
day. Whenever you have a moment or so, repeat it to yourself slowly,
looking about you and trying to realize that the idea applies to
everything you do see now or could see now if it were within the range
of your sight.

^4^ Real vision is not limited to concepts such as "near" and "far." To
help you begin to get used to this idea, try to think of things beyond
your present range as well as those you can actually see, as you apply
today's idea. Real vision is not only unlimited by space and distance,
but it does not depend on the body's eyes at all. The mind is its only
source.

^5^ To aid in helping you to become more accustomed to this idea as
well, devote several practice periods to applying today's idea with your
eyes closed, using whatever subjects come to mind and looking within
rather than without. Today's idea applies equally to both.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_031.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 31 I am not the victim of the world I see**](#part0004.html#level-299) {#part0039_split_031.html#h1-299 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea is the introduction to your declaration of release.
Again, the idea should be applied to both the world you see without and
the world you see within. In applying the idea, we will use a form of
practice which will be used more and more, with changes as indicated.
Generally speaking, the form includes two aspects, one in which you
apply the idea on a more sustained basis, and the other consisting of
frequent applications of the idea throughout the day.

^2^ Two longer periods of practice with the idea for today are needed,
one in the morning and one at night. Three to five minutes for each of
them are recommended. During that time, look about you slowly while
repeating the idea two or three times. Then close your eyes and apply
the same idea to your inner world. You will escape from both together,
for the inner is the cause of the outer.

^3^ As you survey your inner world, merely let whatever thoughts cross
your mind come into your awareness, each to be considered for a moment
and then replaced by the next. Try not to establish any thought of
hierarchy among them. Watch them come and go as dispassionately as
possible. Do not dwell on any one in particular, but try to let the
stream move on evenly and calmly, without any special investment on your
part. As you sit and quietly watch your thoughts, repeat today's idea to
yourself as often as you care to, but with no sense of hurry.

^4^ In addition, repeat the idea for today as often as possible during
the day. Remind yourself that you are making a declaration of
independence in the name of your own freedom. And in your freedom lies
the freedom of the world.

^5^ The idea for today is a particularly useful one to use as a response
to any form of temptation. It is a declaration that you will not yield
to it and put yourself in bondage.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_032.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 32 I have invented the world I see**](#part0004.html#level-300) {#part0039_split_032.html#h1-300 .level1}

^1^ Today we are continuing to develop the theme of cause and effect.
You are not the victim of the world you see because you invented it. You
can give it up as easily as you made it up. You will see it or not see
it, as you wish. While you want it, you will see it; when you no longer
want it, it will not be there for you to see.

^2^ The idea for today, like the preceding ones, applies to your inner
and outer worlds, which are actually the same. However, since you see
them as different, the practice periods for today will again include two
phases, one involving the world you see outside you and the other the
world you see in your mind. In today's exercises, try to introduce the
thought that both are in your own imagination.

^3^ Again we will begin the practice periods for the morning and evening
by repeating the idea for today two or three times while looking around
at the world you see as outside yourself. Then close your eyes and look
around your inner world. Try to treat them both as equally as possible.
Repeat the idea for today unhurriedly as often as you wish as you watch
the images your imagination presents to your awareness.

^4^ For the two longer practice periods, three to five minutes are
recommended, with not less than three required. More than five can be
utilized if you find the exercises restful. To facilitate this, select a
time when few distractions are anticipated and when you yourself feel
reasonably ready.

^5^ These exercises are also to be continued during the day as often as
possible. The shorter applications consist of repeating the idea slowly
as you survey either your inner or outer world. It does not matter which
you choose.

^6^ The idea for today should also be applied immediately to any
situation which may distress you. Apply the idea by telling yourself:

^7^ I have invented this situation as I see it.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_033.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 33 There is another way of looking at the world**](#part0004.html#level-301) {#part0039_split_033.html#h1-301 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea is an attempt to recognize that you can shift your
perception of the world in both its outer and inner aspects. A full five
minutes should be devoted to the morning and evening application.

^2^ In these practice periods, the idea should be repeated as often as
you find profitable, though unhurried applications are essential.
Alternate between surveying your outer and inner perceptions, but
without an abrupt sense of shifting. Merely glance casually around the
world you perceive as outside yourself, then close your eyes and survey
your inner thoughts with equal casualness. Try to remain equally
uninvolved in both and to maintain this detachment as you repeat the
idea throughout the day.

^3^ The shorter exercise periods should be as frequent as possible.
Specific applications of today's idea should also be made immediately
when any situation arises which tempts you to become disturbed. For
these applications, say:

^4^ There is another way of looking at this.

^5^ Remember to apply today's idea the instant you are aware of
distress. It may be necessary to take a minute or so to sit quietly and
repeat the idea to yourself several times. Closing your eyes will
probably help in this form of application.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_034.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 34 I could see peace instead of this**](#part0004.html#level-302) {#part0039_split_034.html#h1-302 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today begins to describe the conditions that prevail in
the other way of seeing. Peace of mind is clearly an internal matter. It
must begin with your own thoughts and then extend outward. It is from
your peace of mind that a peaceful perception of the world arises.

^2^ Three longer practice periods are required for today's exercises.
One in the morning and one in the evening are advised, with an
additional one to be undertaken at any time in between which seems most
conducive to readiness. All applications should be done with your eyes
closed. It is your inner world to which the applications of today's idea
should be made.

^3^ Some five minutes of mind searching are required for each of the
longer practice periods. Search your mind for fear thoughts, anxiety
provoking situations, "offending" personalities or events, or anything
else about which you are harboring unloving thoughts. Note them all
casually, repeating the idea for today slowly as you watch them arise in
your mind, and let each one go, to be replaced by the next.

^4^ If you begin to experience difficulty in thinking of specific
subjects, continue to repeat the idea to yourself in an unhurried
manner, without applying it to anything in particular. Be sure, however,
not to make any specific exclusions.

^5^ The shorter applications are to be frequent and made whenever you
feel your peace of mind is threatened in any way. The purpose is to
protect yourself from temptation throughout the day. If a specific form
of temptation arises in your awareness, the exercise should take this
form:

^6^ I could see peace in this situation instead of\
what I now see in it.

^7^ If the inroads on your peace of mind take the form of more
generalized adverse emotions, such as depression, anxiety, or worry, use
the idea in its original form. If you find you need more than one
application of today's idea to help you change your mind in any specific
context, try to take several minutes and devote them to repeating the
idea until you feel some sense of relief. It will help you if you tell
yourself specifically:

^8^ I can replace my feelings of depression, anxiety\
or worry \[or my thoughts about this situation,\
personality, or event\] with peace.

::: {#part0039_split_034.html#calibre_pb_35 .calibre7}
:::
:::

[]{#part0039_split_035.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 35 My mind is part of God's. I am very holy**](#part0004.html#level-303) {#part0039_split_035.html#h1-303 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea does not describe the way you see yourself now. It
does, however, describe what vision will show you. It is difficult for
anyone who thinks he is in this world to believe this of himself. Yet
the reason he thinks he is in this world is because he does not believe
it.

^2^ You will believe that you are part of where you think you are. That
is because you surround yourself with the environment you want. And you
want it to protect the image of yourself that you have made. The image
is part of it. What you see while you believe you are in it is seen
through the eyes of the image. This is not vision. Images cannot see.

^3^ The idea for today presents a very different view of yourself. By
establishing your Source, it establishes your identity, and it describes
you as you must really be in truth. We will use a somewhat different
kind of application for today's idea, because the emphasis for today is
on the perceiver rather than on what he perceives.

^4^ For each of the three five-minute practice periods today, begin by
repeating today's idea to yourself and then close your eyes and search
your mind for the various kinds of descriptive terms in which you see
yourself. Include all of the ego-based attributes which you ascribe to
yourself, positive or negative, desirable or undesirable, grandiose or
debased. All of them are equally unreal, because you do not look upon
yourself through the eyes of holiness.

^5^ In the earlier part of the mind searching period, you will probably
emphasize what you consider to be the more negative aspects of your
perception of yourself. Toward the latter part of the exercise period,
however, more self-inflating descriptive terms may well cross your mind.
Try to recognize that the direction of your fantasies about yourself
does not matter. Illusions have no direction in reality. They are merely
not true.

^6^ A suitable unselected list for applying the idea for today might be
as follows:

^7^ I see myself as imposed on.\
I see myself as depressed.\
I see myself as failing.\
I see myself as endangered.\
I see myself as helpless.\
I see myself as victorious.\
I see myself as losing out.\
I see myself as charitable.\
I see myself as virtuous.

^8^ You should not think of these terms in an abstract way. They will
occur to you as various situations, personalities and events in which
you figure cross your mind. Pick up any specific situation that occurs
to you, identify the descriptive term or terms which you feel are
applicable to your reactions to that situation, and use them in applying
today's idea. After you have named each one, add:

^9^ But my mind is part of God's. I am very holy.

^10^ During the longer exercise periods, there will probably be
intervals in which nothing specific occurs to you. Do not strain to
think up specific things to fill the interval, but merely relax and
repeat today's idea slowly until something occurs to you. Although
nothing that does occur should be omitted from the exercises, nothing
should be "dug out" with effort. Neither force nor discrimination should
be used.

^11^ As often as possible during the day, pick up a specific attribute
or attributes you are ascribing to yourself at the time and apply the
idea for today to them, adding the idea to each of them in the form
stated above. If nothing particular occurs to you, merely repeat the
idea to yourself with closed eyes.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_036.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 36 My holiness envelops everything I see**](#part0004.html#level-304) {#part0039_split_036.html#h1-304 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea extends the idea for yesterday from the perceiver to
the perceived. You are holy because your mind is part of God's. And
because you are holy, your sight must be holy as well. "Sinless" means
without sin. You cannot be without sin a little. You are sinless or not.
If your mind is part of God's, you must be sinless or a part of His Mind
would be sinful. Your sight is related to His holiness, not to your ego
and therefore not to your body.

^2^ Four three- to five-minute practice periods are required for today.
Try to distribute them fairly evenly, and make the shorter applications
frequently to protect your protection throughout the day. The longer
practice periods should take this form:

^3^ First, close your eyes and repeat the idea for today several times
slowly. Then open your eyes and look quite slowly about you, applying
the idea specifically to whatever you note in your casual survey. Say,
for example:

^4^ My holiness envelops that rug.\
My holiness envelops that wall.\
My holiness envelops these fingers.\
My holiness envelops that chair.\
My holiness envelops that body.\
My holiness envelops this pen.

^5^ Several times during these practice periods, close your eyes and
repeat the idea to yourself. Then open your eyes and continue as before.

^6^ For the shorter exercise periods, close your eyes and repeat the
idea; look about you as you repeat it again; and conclude with one more
repetition with your eyes closed. All applications should, of course, be
made quite slowly, as effortlessly and unhurriedly as possible.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_037.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 37 My holiness blesses the world**](#part0004.html#level-305) {#part0039_split_037.html#h1-305 .level1}

^1^ This idea contains the first glimmerings of your true function in
the world or why you are here. Your purpose is to see the world through
your own holiness. Thus are you and the world blessed together. No one
loses; nothing is taken away from anyone; everyone gains through your
holy vision. It signifies the end of sacrifice because it offers
everyone his full due. And he is entitled to everything because it is
his birthright as a Son of God.

^2^ There is no other way in which the idea of sacrifice can be removed
from the world's thinking. Any other way of seeing will inevitably
demand payment of someone or something. As a result, the perceiver will
lose. Nor will he have any idea why he is losing. Yet is his wholeness
restored to his awareness through your vision. Your holiness blesses him
by asking nothing of him. Those who see themselves as whole make no
demands.

^3^ Your holiness is the salvation of the world. It lets you teach the
world that it is one with you, not by preaching to it, not by telling it
anything, but merely by your quiet recognition that in your holiness are
all things blessed, along with you.

^4^ Today's four longer exercise periods, each to involve three to five
minutes of practice, begin with the repetition of the idea for today
followed by a minute or so of looking about you as you apply the idea to
whatever you see:

^5^ My holiness blesses this chair.\
My holiness blesses that window.\
My holiness blesses this body.

^6^ Then close your eyes and apply the idea to any person who occurs to
you, using his name and saying:

^7^ My holiness blesses you, \[name\].

^8^ You may continue the practice period with your eyes closed; you may
open your eyes again and apply the idea for today to your outer world if
you so desire; you may alternate between applying it to what you see
around you and to those who are in your thoughts; or you may use any
combination of these two phases of application which you prefer. The
practice period should conclude with a repetition of the idea made with
your eyes closed and another following immediately with your eyes open.

^9^ The shorter exercises consist of repeating the idea as often as you
can. It is particularly helpful to apply it silently to anyone you meet,
using his name as you do so. It is essential to use the idea if anyone
seems to cause an adverse reaction in you. Offer him the blessing of
your holiness immediately that you may learn to keep it in your own
awareness.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_038.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 38 There is nothing my holiness cannot do**](#part0004.html#level-306) {#part0039_split_038.html#h1-306 .level1}

^1^ Your holiness reverses all the laws of the world. It is beyond every
restriction of time, space, distance, and limits of any kind. Your
holiness is totally unlimited in its power because it establishes you as
a Son of God, at one with the Mind of his Creator. Through your
holiness, the power of God is made manifest. Through your holiness the
power of God is made available. And there is nothing the power of God
cannot do.

^2^ Your holiness, then, can remove all pain, can end all sorrow, and
can solve all problems. It can do so in connection with yourself and
with anyone else. It is equal in its power to help anyone because it is
equal in its power to save anyone. If you are holy, so is everything God
created. You are holy because all things He created are holy. And all
things He created are holy because you are.

^3^ In today's exercises, we will apply the power of your holiness to
all problems, difficulties, or suffering in any form that you happen to
think of in yourself or someone else. We will make no distinctions
because there are no distinctions.

^4^ In the four longer practice periods, each preferably to last a full
five minutes, repeat the idea for today, close your eyes, and then
search your mind for any sense of loss or unhappiness of any kind as you
see it. Try to make as little distinction as possible between a
situation that is difficult for you and one that is difficult for
someone else. Identify the situation specifically and also the name of
the person concerned. Use this form in applying the idea for today:

^5^ In the situation involving \_\_\_\_\_\_ in which I see myself,\
! there is nothing that my holiness cannot do.\
In the situation involving \_\_\_\_\_\_ in which \_\_\_\_\_ sees
himself,\
there is nothing my holiness cannot do.

^6^ From time to time you may want to vary this procedure and add some
relevant thoughts of your own. You might like, for example, to include
thoughts such as:

^7^ There is nothing my holiness cannot do because\
the power of God lies in it.

^8^ Introduce whatever variations appeal to you, but keep the exercises
focused on the theme, "There is nothing my holiness cannot do." The
purpose of today's exercises is to begin to instill in you a sense that
you have dominion over all things because of what you are.

^9^ In the frequent shorter applications, apply the idea in its original
form unless a specific problem concerning you or someone else arises or
comes to mind. In that event, use the more specific form of application.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_039.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 39 My holiness is my salvation**](#part0004.html#level-307) {#part0039_split_039.html#h1-307 .level1}

^1^ If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? Like the text for which this
workbook was written, the ideas which are used for the exercises are
very simple, very clear, and totally unambiguous. We are not concerned
with intellectual feats nor logical toys. We are dealing only in the
very obvious, which has been overlooked in the clouds of complexity in
which you think you think.

^2^ If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? This is not difficult,
surely. The hesitation you may feel in answering is not due to the
ambiguity of the question. But do you believe that guilt is hell? If you
did, you would see at once how direct and simple the text is, and you
would not need a workbook at all. No one needs practice to gain what is
already his.

^3^ We have already said that your holiness is the salvation of the
world. What about your own salvation? You cannot give what you do not
have. A savior must be saved. How else can he teach salvation? Today's
exercises will apply to you alone, recognizing that your salvation is
crucial to the salvation of the world. As you apply the exercises to
your own world, the whole world stands to benefit.

^4^ Your holiness is the answer to every question that was ever asked,
is being asked now, or will be asked in the future. Your holiness means
the end of guilt and therefore the end of hell. Your holiness is the
salvation of the world and your own. How could you to whom your holiness
belongs be excluded from it? God does not know unholiness. Can it be He
does not know His Son?

^5^ A full five minutes are urged for the four longer practice periods
for today. Longer and more frequent practice sessions are encouraged. If
you want to exceed the minimum requirements, more rather than longer
sessions are recommended, although both are encouraged.

^6^ Begin the practice periods as usual by repeating today's idea to
yourself. Then with closed eyes search out your unloving thoughts in
whatever form they appear-uneasiness, depression, anger, fear, worry,
attack, insecurity, and so on. Whatever form they take, they are
unloving and therefore fearful. And so it is from them that you need to
be saved.

^7^ Specific situations, events, or personalities you associate with
unloving thoughts of any kind are suitable subjects for today's
exercises. It is imperative for your own salvation that you see them
differently. And it is your blessing on them that will save you and give
you vision.

^8^ Slowly, without conscious selection and without undue emphasis on
any one in particular, search your mind for every thought that stands
between you and your salvation. Apply the idea for today to each one of
them in this way:

^9^ My unloving thoughts about \_\_\_ are keeping me in hell.\
! My holiness is my salvation.

^10^ You may find these sessions easier if you intersperse the
applications with several short periods during which you merely repeat
today's idea to yourself slowly a few times. You may also find it
helpful to include a few short intervals in which you just relax and do
not seem to be thinking of anything. Sustained concentration is very
difficult at first. It will become much easier as your mind becomes more
disciplined and less distractible.

^11^ Meanwhile, you should feel free to introduce variety into your
practice periods in whatever form appeals to you. Do not, however,
change the idea itself in varying the method of applying it. However you
elect to use it, the idea should be stated so that its meaning remains
that your holiness is your salvation.

^12^ End each practice period by repeating the idea in its original form
once more, and adding:

^13^ If guilt is hell, what is its opposite?

^14^ In the shorter applications, which should be made some three or
four times an hour and more if possible, you may ask yourself this
question, repeat today's idea, or preferably both. If temptations arise,
a particularly helpful form of the idea is:

^15^ My holiness is my salvation from this.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_040.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 40 I am blessed as a Son of God**](#part0004.html#level-308) {#part0039_split_040.html#h1-308 .level1}

^1^ Today we will begin to assert some of the happy things to which you
are entitled, being what you are. No long practice periods are required
today, but very frequent short ones are necessary. Once every ten
minutes would be highly desirable, and you are urged to attempt this
schedule and to adhere to it whenever possible. If you forget, try
again. If there are long interruptions, try again. Whenever you
remember, try again.

^2^ You need not close your eyes for the exercise periods, although you
will probably find it more helpful if you do. However, you may be in a
number of situations during the day when closing your eyes would not be
appropriate. Do not miss a practice period because of this. You can
practice quite well under almost any circumstance, if you really want
to.

^3^ Today's exercises take little time and no effort. Repeat today's
idea, and then add several of the attributes which you associate with
being a Son of God, applying them to yourself. One practice period
might, for example, consist of the following:

^4^ I am blessed as a Son of God.\
I am happy, peaceful, loving, and contented.

^5^ Another might be something as follows:

^6^ I am blessed as a Son of God.\
I am calm, quiet, assured, and confident.

^7^ If only a brief period is available, merely telling yourself that
you are blessed as a Son of God will do.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_041.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 41 God goes with me wherever I go**](#part0004.html#level-309) {#part0039_split_041.html#h1-309 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea will eventually overcome completely the sense of
loneliness and abandonment which all the separated ones experience.
Depression is an inevitable consequence of separation. So are anxiety,
worry, a deep sense of helplessness, misery, suffering, and intense fear
of loss. The separated ones have invented many "cures" for what they
believe to be the "ills of the world." But the one thing they do not do
is to question the reality of the problem. Yet its effects cannot be
cured because the problem is not real.

^2^ The idea for today has the power to end all this foolishness
forever. And foolishness it is, despite the serious and tragic forms it
may take. Deep within you is everything that is perfect, ready to
radiate through you and out into the whole world. It will cure all
sorrow and pain and fear and loss because it will heal the mind that
thought these things were real and suffered out of its allegiance to
them.

^3^ You can never be deprived of your perfect holiness, because its
Source goes with you wherever you go. You can never suffer, because the
Source of all joy goes with you wherever you go. You can never be alone,
because the Source of all life goes with you wherever you go. Nothing
can destroy your peace of mind, because God goes with you wherever you
go.

^4^ We understand that you do not believe all this. How could you, when
the truth is hidden deep within under a heavy cloud of insane thoughts,
dense and obscuring, yet representing all you see? Today we will make
our first real attempt to get past this dark and heavy cloud and to go
through it to the light beyond.

^5^ There will be only one long practice period today. In the morning,
as soon as you get up if possible, sit quietly for some three to five
minutes with your eyes closed. At the beginning of the practice period,
repeat today's idea very slowly. Then make no effort to think of
anything. Try instead to get a sense of turning inward, past all the
idle thoughts of the world. Try to enter very deeply into your own mind,
keeping it clear of any thoughts that might divert your attention.

^6^ From time to time, you may repeat today's idea if you find it
helpful. But most of all, try to sink down and inward, away from the
world and all the foolish thoughts of the world. You are trying to reach
past all these things. You are trying to leave appearances and approach
reality.

^7^ It is quite possible to reach God. In fact it is very easy because
it is the most natural thing in the world. You might even say it is the
only natural thing in the world. The way will open if you believe that
it is possible. This exercise can bring very startling results even the
first time it is attempted. And sooner or later, it is always
successful. We will go into more detail in connection with this kind of
practice as we go along. But it will never fail completely, and instant
success is possible.

^8^ Throughout the day, use today's idea often, repeating it very slowly
and preferably with eyes closed. Think of what you are saying; what the
words mean. Concentrate on the holiness which they imply about you; on
the unfailing companionship which is yours; on the complete protection
that surrounds you.

^9^ You can indeed afford to laugh at fear thoughts, remembering that
God goes with you wherever you go.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_042.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 42 God is my strength. Vision is His gift**](#part0004.html#level-310) {#part0039_split_042.html#h1-310 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today combines two very powerful thoughts, both of
major importance. It also sets forth a cause and effect relationship
which explains why you cannot fail in your efforts to achieve the goal
of the course. You will see because it is the Will of God. It is His
strength, not your own, that gives you power. And it is His gift to you,
rather than your own, which offers vision to you.

^2^ God is indeed your strength. And what He gives is truly given. This
means that you can receive it any time and anywhere, wherever you are
and in whatever circumstances you find yourself. Your passage through
time and space is not random. You cannot but be in the right place at
the right time. Such is the strength of God. Such are His gifts.

^3^ We will have two three- to five-minute longer exercise periods
today, one as soon as possible after you wake and another as close as
possible to the time you go to sleep. It is better, however, to wait
until you can sit quietly by yourself at a time when you feel ready than
it is to be concerned with the time as such.

^4^ Begin the practice period by repeating the idea for today slowly
with eyes open, looking about you. Then close your eyes and repeat the
idea again, quite slowly. After this, try to think of nothing except
thoughts which occur to you in relation to today's idea. You might
think, for example:

^5^ Vision must be possible. God gives truly; or,\
God's gifts to me must be mine because He gave them to me.

^6^ Whatever thought that is clearly related to the idea itself is
suitable. You may, in fact, be astonished at the amount of
course-related understanding some of your own thoughts contain. Let them
come without censoring unless you realize your mind is merely wandering
and you have let obviously irrelevant thoughts intrude. You may also
reach a point where no thoughts at all seem to come to mind. If such
interferences occur, open your eyes and repeat the thought once more
while looking slowly about; close your eyes, repeat the idea once more,
and then continue to look for related thoughts in your mind.

^7^ Remember, though, that active searching is not appropriate for
today's exercises. Try merely to step back and let the thoughts come. If
you find this difficult, it is better to spend the practice period
alternating between slow repetitions of the idea with eyes open, then
closed, then open, and so on, than it is to strain in order to find
suitable thoughts.

^8^ There is no limit on the number of short practice periods which
would be most beneficial. The idea for the day is a beginning step in
bringing thoughts together and teaching you that what you are studying
is a unified thought system in which nothing is lacking that is needed,
and nothing is included that is contradictory or irrelevant.

^9^ The more often you repeat the idea during the day, the more often
you will be reminding yourself that the goal of the course is important
to you, and that you have not forgotten it.

::: {#part0039_split_042.html#calibre_pb_44 .calibre7}
:::
:::

[]{#part0039_split_043.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 43 God is my Source. I cannot see apart from Him**](#part0004.html#level-311) {#part0039_split_043.html#h1-311 .level1}

^1^ Perception is not an attribute of God. His is the realm of
knowledge. Yet He has created the Holy Spirit as the Mediator between
perception and knowledge. Without this link with God, perception would
have replaced knowledge forever in your minds. With this link with God,
perception will become so changed and purified that it will lead to
knowledge. That is its function as the Holy Spirit sees it. Therefore,
that is its function in truth.

^2^ In God you cannot see. Perception has no function in God and does
not exist. Yet in salvation, which is the undoing of what never was,
perception has a mighty purpose. Made by the Son of God for an unholy
purpose, it must become the means for the restoration of his holiness to
his awareness. Perception has no meaning. Yet does the Holy Spirit give
it a meaning very close to God's. Healed perception becomes the means by
which the Son of God forgives his brother and thus forgives himself.

^3^ You cannot see apart from God because you cannot be apart from God.
Whatever you do, you do in Him because whatever you think, you think
with His Mind. If vision is real, and it is real to the extent to which
it shares the Holy Spirit's purpose, then you cannot see apart from God.

^4^ Three five-minute practice periods are required today, one as early
as possible and another as late as possible. The third may be undertaken
at the most convenient and suitable time which circumstances and
readiness permit.

^5^ At the beginning of these practice periods, repeat the idea to
yourself with eyes open. Then glance around you for a short time,
applying the idea specifically to what you see. Four or five subjects
for this phase of the exercises are sufficient. You might say, for
example:

^6^ God is my Source. I cannot see this desk apart from Him.\
God is my Source. I cannot see that picture apart from Him.

^7^ Although this part of the exercise period should be relatively
short, be sure that you select the subjects for this phase
indiscriminately, without self-directed inclusion or exclusion.

^8^ For the second and longer phase of the exercise period, close your
eyes, repeat today's idea again, and then let whatever relevant thoughts
occur to you add to the idea in your own personal way. Thoughts such as:

^9^ I see through the eyes of forgiveness.\
I see the world as blessed.\
The world can show me myself.\
I see my own thoughts, which are like God's.

^10^ Any thought related more or less directly to today's idea is
suitable. The thoughts need not bear an obvious relationship to the
idea, but they should not be in opposition to it.

^11^ If you should find your mind wandering, if you begin to be aware of
thoughts which are clearly out of accord with today's idea, or if you
seem to be unable to think of anything, open your eyes, repeat the first
phase, and then try the second phase again. Do not allow any protracted
period to occur in which you become preoccupied with irrelevant
thoughts. Return to the first phase of the exercises as often as
necessary to prevent this.

^12^ In applying today's idea in the shorter practice periods, the form
may vary according to the circumstances and situations in which you find
yourself during the day. When you are with someone else, for example,
try to remember to tell him silently,

^13^ God is my Source. I cannot see you apart from Him.

^14^ This form is equally applicable to strangers and to those you know
well. Try, in fact, not to make distinctions of this kind at all.

^15^ The idea should also be applied throughout the day to various
situations and events which may occur, particularly to those which
distress you in any way. For this kind of application, use this form:

^16^ God is my Source. I cannot see this apart from Him.

^17^ If no particular subject presents itself to your awareness, merely
repeat the idea in its original form.

^18^ Try today not to allow long periods of time to slip by without
remembering today's idea and thus remembering your function.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_044.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 44 God is the Light in which I see**](#part0004.html#level-312) {#part0039_split_044.html#h1-312 .level1}

^1^ Today we are continuing with the idea for yesterday, adding another
dimension to it. You cannot see in darkness, and you cannot make light.
You can make darkness and then think you see in it, but light reflects
life and is therefore an aspect of creation. Creation and darkness
cannot coexist, but light and life must go together, being but different
aspects of creation.

^2^ In order to see, one must recognize that light is within, not
without. You do not see outside yourself, nor is the equipment for
seeing outside you. An essential part of this equipment is the light
that makes seeing possible. It is with you always, making vision
possible in every circumstance.

^3^ Today we are going to attempt to reach that light. For that purpose,
we will use a form of practice which has been suggested once before and
which we will utilize increasingly. It is a particularly difficult form
for the undisciplined mind because it represents a major goal of mind
training. It embodies precisely what the untrained mind lacks. Yet the
training must be accomplished if you are to see.

^4^ Have at least three practice periods today, each lasting three to
five minutes. A longer time is highly recommended, but only if you find
the time merely slipping by with little or no sense of strain. The form
of exercise we will use today is the most natural and easy one in the
world for the trained mind, just as it seems to be the most unnatural
and difficult for the untrained mind.

^5^ Your mind is no longer wholly untrained. You are quite ready to
learn the form of exercise we will use today, but you may find that you
will encounter strong resistance. The reason is very simple. While you
practice in this form, you leave behind everything that you now believe
and all the thoughts which you have made up. Properly speaking, this is
the release from hell. Perceived through the ego's eyes, it is loss of
identity and a descent into hell.

^6^ If you can stand aside from the ego ever so little, you will have no
difficulty in recognizing that its opposition and fears are meaningless.
You might find it helpful to remind yourself from time to time that to
reach light is to escape from darkness, whatever you may believe to the
contrary. God is the Light in which you see. You are attempting to reach
Him.

^7^ Begin the practice period by repeating today's idea with your eyes
open and close them slowly, repeating the idea several times more. Then
try to sink into your mind, letting go every kind of interference and
intrusion by quietly sinking past them. Your mind cannot be stopped in
this unless you choose to stop it. It is merely taking its natural
course. Try to observe your passing thoughts without involvement and
slip quietly by them.

^8^ While no particular form of approach is advocated, what is needful
is a sense of the importance of what you are doing, its inestimable
value to you, and an awareness that you are attempting something very
holy. Salvation is your happiest accomplishment. It is also the only one
that has any meaning because it is the only one that has any use to you
at all.

^9^ If resistance rises in any form, pause long enough to repeat today's
idea, keeping your eyes closed unless you are aware of fear. In that
case, you will probably find it more reassuring to open your eyes
briefly. Try, however, to return to the exercises as soon as possible.

^10^ If you are doing the exercises correctly, you should experience
some sense of relaxation and even a feeling that you are approaching if
not actually entering into light. Try to think of light, formless and
without limit, as you pass by the thoughts of this world. And do not
forget that they cannot hold you to the world unless you give them the
power to do so.

^11^ Throughout the day, repeat the idea often with eyes open or closed
as seems better to you at the time. Do not forget. Above all, be
determined not to forget today.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_045.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 45 God is the Mind with which I think**](#part0004.html#level-313) {#part0039_split_045.html#h1-313 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea holds the key to what your real thoughts are. They are
nothing that you think you think, just as nothing that you think you see
is related to vision in any way. There is no relationship between what
is real and what you think is real. Nothing that you think are your real
thoughts resemble your real thoughts in any respect. Nothing that you
think you see bears any resemblance to what vision will show you.

^2^ You think with the Mind of God. Therefore you share your thoughts
with Him, as He shares His with you. They are the same thoughts because
they are thought by the same Mind. To share is to make alike or to make
one. Nor do the thoughts you think with the Mind of God leave your mind,
because thoughts do not leave their source. Therefore your thoughts are
in the Mind of God, as you are. They are in your mind as well, where He
is. As you are part of His Mind, so are your thoughts part of His
Thoughts.

^3^ Where, then, are your real thoughts? Today we will attempt to reach
them. We will have to look for them in your mind because that is where
they are. They must still be there because they cannot have left. What
is thought by the Mind of God is eternal, being part of creation.

^4^ Our three five-minute practice periods for today will take the same
general form that we used in applying yesterday's idea. We will attempt
to leave the unreal and seek for the real. We will deny the world in
favor of truth. We will not let the thoughts of the world hold us back,
and we will not let the beliefs of the world tell us that what God would
have us do is impossible.

^5^ Instead, we will try to recognize that only what God would have us
do is possible. We will also try to understand that only what God would
have us do is what we want to do. And we will also try to remember that
we cannot fail in doing what He would have us do. There is every reason
to feel confident that you will succeed today. It is the Will of God.

^6^ Begin the exercises for today by repeating the idea to yourself,
closing your eyes as you do so. Spend a fairly short period in thinking
a few relevant thoughts of your own, keeping the idea in mind as you do
so. After you have added some four or five thoughts of your own, repeat
the idea again, and tell yourself gently:

^7^ My real thoughts are in my mind. I would like to find them.

^8^ Then try to go past all the unreal thoughts that cover the truth in
your mind, and reach to the eternal.

^9^ Under all the senseless thoughts and mad ideas with which you have
cluttered up your mind are the thoughts which you thought with God in
the beginning. They are there in your mind now, completely unchanged.
They will always be in your mind, exactly as they always were.

^10^ Everything that you have thought since then will change, but the
foundation on which they rest is wholly changeless. It is this
foundation toward which the exercises for today are directed. Here is
your mind joined with the Mind of God. Here are your thoughts one with
His.

^11^ For this kind of practice, only one thing is necessary-approach it
as you would an altar dedicated in Heaven itself to God the Father and
God the Son. For such is the place you are trying to reach. You will
probably be unable as yet to realize how high you are trying to go. Yet
even with the little understanding you have already gained, you should
be able to remind yourself that this is no idle game but an exercise in
holiness and an attempt to reach the Kingdom of Heaven.

^12^ In using the shorter form for applying today's idea, try to
remember how important it is to you to understand the holiness of the
mind that thinks with God. Take a minute or two as you repeat the idea
throughout the day to appreciate your mind's holiness. Stand aside,
however briefly, from all thoughts that are unworthy of Him Whose host
you are. And thank Him for the thoughts He is thinking with you.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_046.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 46 God is the Love in which I forgive**](#part0004.html#level-314) {#part0039_split_046.html#h1-314 .level1}

^1^ God does not forgive because He has never condemned. And there must
be condemnation before forgiveness is necessary. Forgiveness is the
great need of this world, but that is because it is a world of
illusions. Those who forgive are thus releasing themselves from
illusions, while those who withhold forgiveness are binding themselves
to them. As you condemn only yourself, so do you forgive only yourself.

^2^ Although God does not forgive, His Love is nevertheless the basis of
forgiveness. Fear condemns, and love forgives. Forgiveness thus undoes
what fear has produced, returning the mind to the awareness of God. For
this reason, forgiveness can truly be called salvation. It is the means
by which illusions disappear.

^3^ Today's exercises require at least three full five-minute practice
periods and as many shorter applications as possible. Begin the practice
periods by repeating today's idea to yourself, as usual. Close your eyes
as you do so and spend a minute or two in searching your mind for those
whom you have not forgiven. It does not matter "how much" you have not
forgiven. You have forgiven them entirely or not at all.

^4^ If you are doing the exercises well, you should have no difficulty
in finding a number of people you have not forgiven. It is a safe rule
that anyone you do not like is a suitable subject. Mention each one by
name and say:

^5^ God is the Love in which I forgive you, \[name\].

^6^ The purpose of the first phase of today's practice is to put you in
the best position to forgive yourself. After you have applied the idea
for today to all those who have come to mind, tell yourself,

^7^ God is the Love in which I forgive myself.

^8^ Then devote the remainder of the practice period to offering related
ideas such as:

^9^ God is the Love with which I love myself.\
God is the Love in which I am blessed.

^10^ The form of the applications may vary considerably, but the central
idea should not be lost sight of. You might say, for example:

^11^ I cannot be guilty because I am a Son of God.\
I have already been forgiven.\
No fear is possible in a mind beloved of God.\
There is no need to attack because Love has forgiven me.

^12^ The practice period should end, however, with a repetition of
today's idea as originally stated.

^13^ The shorter applications may consist either of a repetition of the
idea for today in the original or in a related form, or in more specific
applications if needed. They will be needed at any time during the day
when you become aware of any kind of negative reaction to anyone,
present or not. In this event, tell him silently,

^14^ God is the Love in which I forgive you.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_047.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 47 God is the Strength in which I trust**](#part0004.html#level-315) {#part0039_split_047.html#h1-315 .level1}

^1^ If you are trusting your own strength, you have every reason to be
apprehensive, anxious, and fearful. What can you predict or control?
What is there in you that can be counted on? What would give you the
ability to be aware of all the facets of any problem and to resolve them
in such a way that only good can come of it? What is there in you that
gives you the recognition of the right solution and the guarantee that
it will be accomplished?

^2^ Of yourself, you can do none of these things. To believe that you
can is to put your trust where trust is unwarranted and to justify fear,
anxiety, depression, anger, and sorrow. Who can put his faith in
weakness and feel safe? Yet who can put his faith in strength and feel
weak?

^3^ God is your safety in every circumstance. His Voice speaks for Him
in all situations and in every aspect of all situations, telling you
exactly what to do to call upon His strength and His protection. There
are no exceptions because God has no exceptions. And the Voice Which
speaks for Him thinks as He does.

^4^ Today we will try to reach past your own weakness to the Source of
real strength. Four five-minute practice periods are necessary today,
and longer and more frequent ones are urged. Close your eyes and begin
as usual by repeating today's idea. Then spend a minute or two in
searching for situations in your life which you have invested with fear,
dismissing each one by telling yourself,

^5^ God is the Strength in which I trust.

^6^ Now try to slip past all concerns related to your own sense of
inadequacy. It is obvious that any situation that causes you concern is
associated with feelings of inadequacy, since otherwise you would
believe that you could deal with the situation successfully. It is not
by trusting yourself that you will gain confidence. But the strength of
God in you is successful in all things.

^7^ The recognition of your own frailty is a necessary step in the
correction of your errors, but it is hardly a sufficient one in giving
you the confidence which you need and to which you are entitled. You
must also gain an awareness that your confidence in your real strength
is fully justified in every respect and in all circumstances.

^8^ In the latter phase of the practice period, try to reach down into
your mind to a place of real safety. You will recognize that you have
reached it if you feel a deep peace, however briefly. Let go all the
trivial things that churn and bubble on the surface of your mind, and
reach down and below them to the Kingdom of Heaven. There is a place in
you where there is perfect peace. There is a place in you where nothing
is impossible. There is a place in you where the strength of God abides.

^9^ Repeat the idea for today often. Use it as your answer to any
disturbance. Remember that peace is your right because you are giving
your trust to the strength of God.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_048.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 48 There is nothing to fear**](#part0004.html#level-316) {#part0039_split_048.html#h1-316 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today simply states a fact. It is not a fact to those
who believe in illusions, but illusions are not facts. In truth there is
nothing to fear. It is very easy to recognize this. But it is very
difficult to recognize for those who want illusions to be true.

^2^ Today's practice periods will be very short, very simple, and very
frequent. Merely repeat the idea as often as possible. You can use it
with your eyes open at any time and in any situation. It is strongly
recommended, however, that you take a minute or so whenever possible to
close your eyes and repeat the idea slowly to yourself several times. It
is particularly important that you use the idea immediately should
anything disturb your peace of mind.

^3^ The presence of fear is a sure sign that you are trusting in your
own strength. The awareness that there is nothing to fear shows that
somewhere in your mind, not necessarily in a place which you recognize
as yet, you have remembered God and let His strength take the place of
yours. The instant you are willing to do this there is indeed nothing to
fear.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_049.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 49 God's Voice speaks to me all through the day**](#part0004.html#level-317) {#part0039_split_049.html#h1-317 .level1}

^1^ It is quite possible to listen to God's Voice all through the day
without interrupting your regular activities in any way. The part of
your mind in which truth abides is in constant communication with God,
whether you are aware of it or not. It is the other part of your mind
that functions in the world and obeys the world's laws. It is this part
which is constantly distracted, disorganized, and highly uncertain.

^2^ The part that is listening to the Voice of God is calm, always at
rest, and wholly certain. It is really the only part there is. The other
part is a wild illusion, frantic and distraught, but without reality of
any kind. Try today not to listen to it. Try to identify with the part
of your mind where stillness and peace reign forever. Try to hear God's
Voice call to you lovingly, reminding you that your Creator has not
forgotten His Son.

^3^ We will need at least four five-minute practice periods today and
more if possible. We will try actually to hear the Voice reminding you
of God and of your Self. We will approach this happiest and holiest of
thoughts with confidence, knowing that in doing so we are joining our
will with the Will of God. He wants you to hear His Voice. He gave It to
you to be heard.

^4^ Listen in deep silence. Be very still, and open your mind. Go past
all the raucous shrieks and sick imaginings that cover your real
thoughts and obscure your eternal link with God. Sink deep into the
peace that waits for you beyond the frantic, riotous thoughts and sounds
and sights of this insane world. You do not live there. We are trying to
reach your real home. We are trying to reach the place where you are
truly welcome. We are trying to reach God.

^5^ Do not forget to repeat today's idea very frequently. Do so with
your eyes open when necessary, but closed when possible. And be sure
that you sit quietly and repeat the idea for today slowly whenever you
can, closing your eyes on the world and realizing that you are inviting
God's Voice to speak to you.
:::

[]{#part0039_split_050.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 50 I am sustained by the Love of God**](#part0004.html#level-318) {#part0039_split_050.html#h1-318 .level1}

^1^ Here is the answer to every problem that confronts you today and
tomorrow and throughout time. In this world, you believe you are
sustained by everything but God. Your faith is placed in the most
trivial and insane symbols-pills, money, "protective" clothing,
"influence," "prestige," being liked, knowing the "right" people, and an
endless list of forms of nothingness which you endow with magical
powers. All these things are your replacements for the Love of God. All
these things are cherished to ensure a body identification. They are
songs of praise to the ego.

^2^ Do not put your faith in the worthless. It will not sustain you.
Only the Love of God will protect you in all circumstances. It will lift
you out of every trial and raise you high above all the perceived
dangers of this world into a climate of perfect peace and safety. It
will transport you into a state of mind which nothing can threaten,
nothing can disturb, and where nothing can intrude upon the eternal calm
of the Son of God.

^3^ Put not your faith in illusions. They will fail you. Put all your
faith in the Love of God within you, eternal, changeless and forever
unfailing. This is the answer to whatever confronts you today. Through
the Love of God in you, you can resolve all seeming difficulties without
effort and in sure confidence. Tell yourself this often today. It is a
declaration of release from the belief in idols. It is your
acknowledgment of the truth about yourself.

^4^ For ten minutes twice today, morning and evening, let the idea for
today sink deep into your consciousness. Repeat it, think about it, let
related thoughts come to help you recognize its truth, and allow peace
to flow over you like a blanket of protection and surety. Let no idle
and foolish thoughts enter to disturb the holy mind of the Son of God.
Such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Such is the resting place where your
Father has placed you forever.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review I**](#part0004.html#parta-1) {#part0040_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R1:1^ Beginning with today, we will have a series of review periods.
Each of them will cover five of the ideas already presented, starting
with the first and ending with the fiftieth. There will be a few short
comments after each of the ideas which you should consider in your
review. In the practice periods, the exercises should be done as
follows:

^2^ Begin the day by reading the five ideas, with the comments included.
Thereafter, it is not necessary to follow any particular order in
considering them, though each one should be practiced at least once.
Devote two minutes or more to each practice period, thinking about the
idea and the related comments. Do this as often as possible during the
day. If any one of the five ideas appeals to you more than the others,
concentrate on that one. At the end of the day, however, be sure to
review all of them once more.

^3^ It is not necessary to cover the comments that follow each idea
literally or thoroughly in the practice periods. Rather, try merely to
emphasize the central point and think about it as part of your review of
the idea to which it relates.

^4^ The review exercises should be done with your eyes closed and when
you are alone in a quiet place if possible. This is emphasized
particularly for reviews at your stage of learning. It will be
necessary, however, that you learn to require no special settings in
which to apply what you have learned. You will need it most in
situations which appear to be upsetting, rather than in those which
already seem to be calm and quiet.

^5^ The purpose of your learning is to enable you to bring the quiet
with you and to heal distress and turmoil. This is not done by avoiding
them and seeking a haven of isolation for yourself. You will yet learn
that peace is part of you and requires only that you be there to embrace
any situation in which you are. And finally you will learn that there is
no limit to where you are, so that your peace is everywhere, as you are.

^6^ You will note that for review purposes the ideas are not always
given in quite their original form of statement. Use them as they are
given here. It is not necessary to return to the original statements nor
to apply the ideas as was suggested then. We are now emphasizing the
relationships among the first fifty of the ideas we have covered and the
cohesiveness of the thought system to which they are leading you.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 51**](#part0004.html#level-319) {#part0040_split_001.html#h1-319 .level1}

^1^ The review for today covers the following ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[1\] Nothing I see means anything.

^2^ The reason this is so is that I see nothing, and nothing has no
meaning. It is necessary that I recognize this, that I may learn to see.
What I think I see now is taking the place of vision. I must let it go
by realizing that it has no meaning so that vision may take its place.

\[2\] I have given what I see all the meaning it has for me.

^3^ I have judged everything I look upon. And it is this and only this
that I see. This is not vision. It is merely an illusion of reality,
because my judgments have been made quite apart from reality. I am
willing to recognize the lack of validity in my judgments because I want
to see. My judgments have hurt me, and I do not want to see according to
them.

\[3\] I do not understand anything I see.

^4^ How could I understand what I see when I have judged it amiss? What
I see is the projection of my own errors of thought. I do not understand
what I see because it is not understandable. There is no sense in trying
to understand it. But there is every reason to let it go and make room
for what can be seen and understood and loved. I can exchange what I see
now for this merely by being willing to do so. Is not this a better
choice than the one I made before?

\[4\] These thoughts do not mean anything.

^5^ The thoughts of which I am aware do not mean anything because I am
trying to think without God. What I call "my" thoughts are not my real
thoughts. My real thoughts are the thoughts I think with God. I am not
aware of them because I have made "my" thoughts to take their place. I
am willing to recognize that "my" thoughts do not mean anything and to
let them go. I choose to have them be replaced by what they were
intended to replace. "My" thoughts are meaningless, but all creation
lies in the thoughts I think with God.

\[5\] I am never upset for the reason I think.

^6^ I am never upset for the reason I think because I am constantly
trying to justify "my" thoughts. I am constantly trying to make them
true. I make all things my "enemies" so that my anger is justified and
my attacks are warranted. I have not realized how much I have misused
everything I see by assigning this role to it. I have done this to
defend a thought system which has hurt me and which I no longer want. I
am willing to let it go.
:::
:::

[]{#part0040_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 52**](#part0004.html#level-320) {#part0040_split_002.html#h1-320 .level1}

^1^ Today's review covers these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[6\] I am upset because I see what is not there.

^2^ Reality is never frightening. It is impossible that it could upset
me. Reality brings only perfect peace. When I am upset, it is always
because I have replaced reality with illusions which I made up. The
illusions are upsetting because I have given them reality and thus
regard reality as an illusion. Nothing in God's creation is affected in
any way by this confusion of mine. I am always upset by nothing.

\[7\] I see only the past.

^3^ As I look about, I condemn the world I look upon. I call this
seeing. I hold the past against everyone and everything, making them my
"enemies." When I have forgiven myself and remembered who I am, I will
bless everyone and everything I see. There will be no past and therefore
no "enemies." And I will look with God on all that I failed to see
before.

\[8\] My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.

^4^ I see only my own thoughts, and my mind is preoccupied with the
past. What, then, can I see as it is? Let me remember that I look on the
past to prevent the present from dawning on my mind. Let me understand
that I am trying to use time against God. Let me learn to give the past
away, realizing that in so doing I am giving up nothing.

\[9\] I see nothing as it is now.

^5^ If I see nothing as it is now, it can truly be said that I see
nothing. I can see only what is now. The choice is not whether to see
the past or the present: it is merely whether to see or not. What I have
chosen to see has cost me vision. Now I would choose again that I may
see.

\[10\] My thoughts do not mean anything.
:::

^6^ I have no private thoughts. Yet it is only private thoughts of which
I am aware. What can these thoughts mean? They do not exist, and so they
mean nothing. Yet my mind is part of creation and part of its Creator.
Would I not rather join the thinking of the universe than to obscure all
that is really mine with my pitiful and meaningless "private" thoughts?
:::

[]{#part0040_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 53**](#part0004.html#level-321) {#part0040_split_003.html#h1-321 .level1}

^1^ Today we will review the following:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[11\] My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.

^2^ Since the thoughts of which I am aware do not mean anything, the
world which pictures them can have no meaning. What is producing this
world is insane, and so is what it produces. Reality is not insane, and
I have real thoughts as well as insane ones. I can therefore see a real
world if I look to my real thoughts as my guide for seeing.

\[12\] I am upset because I see a meaningless world.

^3^ Insane thoughts are upsetting. They produce a world in which there
is no order anywhere. Only chaos rules a world which represents chaotic
thinking, and chaos has no laws. I cannot live in peace in such a world.
I am grateful that this world is not real and that I need not see it at
all unless I choose to value it. And I do not choose to value what is
totally insane and has no meaning.

\[13\] A meaningless world engenders fear.

^4^ The totally insane engenders fear because it is completely
undependable and offers no grounds for trust. Nothing in madness is
dependable. It holds out no safety and no hope. But such a world is not
real. I have given it the illusion of reality, and have suffered from my
belief in it. Now I choose to withdraw this belief and place my trust in
reality. In choosing this, I will escape all the effects of the world of
fear because I am acknowledging that it does not exist.

\[14\] God did not create a meaningless world.

^5^ How can a meaningless world exist if God did not create it? He is
the Source of all meaning, and everything that is real is in His Mind.
It is in my mind too because He created it with me. Why should I
continue to suffer from the effects of my own insane thoughts when the
perfection of creation is my home? Let me remember the power of my
decision and recognize where I really abide.

\[15\] My thoughts are images which I have made.
:::

^6^ Whatever I see reflects my thoughts. It is my thoughts which tell me
where I am and what I am. The fact that I see a world in which there is
suffering and loss and death shows me that I am seeing only the
representation of my insane thoughts and am not allowing my real
thoughts to cast their beneficent light on what I see. Yet God's way is
sure. The images I have made cannot prevail against Him because it is
not my will that they do so. My will is His, and I will place no other
gods before Him.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 54**](#part0004.html#level-322) {#part0040_split_004.html#h1-322 .level1}

^1^ These are the review ideas for today:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[16\] I have no neutral thoughts.

^2^ Neutral thoughts are impossible because all thoughts have power.
They will either make a false world or lead me to the real one. But
thoughts cannot be without effects. As the world I see arises from my
thinking errors, so will the real world rise before my eyes as I let my
errors be corrected. My thoughts cannot be neither true nor false. They
must be one or the other. What I see shows me which they are.

\[17\] I see no neutral things.

^3^ What I see witnesses to what I think. If I did not think, I would
not exist, because life is thought. Let me look on the world I see as
the representation of my own state of mind. I know that my state of mind
can change. And so I also know the world I see can change as well.

\[18\] I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.

^4^ If I have no private thoughts, I cannot see a private world. Even
the mad idea of separation had to be shared before it could form the
basis of the world I see. Yet that sharing was a sharing of nothing. I
can also call upon my real thoughts, which share everything with
everybody. As my thoughts of separation call to the separation thoughts
of others, so my real thoughts awaken the real thoughts in them. And the
world my real thoughts show me will dawn on their sight as well as mine.

\[19\] I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts.

^5^ I am alone in nothing. Everything I think or say or do touches all
the universe. A Son of God cannot think or speak or act in vain. He
cannot be alone in anything. It is therefore in my power to change every
mind along with mine, for mine is the power of God.

\[20\] I am determined to see.

^6^ Recognizing the shared nature of my thoughts, I am determined to
see. I would look upon the witnesses that show me the thinking of the
world has been changed. I would behold the proof that what has been done
through me has enabled love to replace fear, laughter to replace
weeping, and abundance to replace loss. I would look upon the real
world, and let it teach me that my will and the Will of God are one.
:::
:::

[]{#part0040_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 55**](#part0004.html#level-323) {#part0040_split_005.html#h1-323 .level1}

^1^ Today's review includes the following:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[21\] I am determined to see things differently.

^2^ What I see now are but signs of disease, disaster, and death. This
cannot be what God created for His beloved Son. The very fact that I see
such things is proof that I do not understand God. Therefore I also do
not understand His Son. What I see tells me that I do not know who I am.
I am determined to see the witnesses to the truth in me, rather than
those that show me an illusion of myself.

\[22\] What I see is a form of vengeance.

^3^ The world I see is hardly the representation of loving thoughts. It
is a picture of attack on everything and by everything. It is anything
but a reflection of the Love of God and the love of His Son. It is my
own attack thoughts which give rise to this picture. My loving thoughts
will save me from this perception of the world and give me the peace God
intended me to have.

\[23\] I can escape from the world by giving up attack thoughts.

^4^ Herein lies my salvation, and nowhere else. Without attack thoughts
I could not see a world of attack. As forgiveness allows love to return
to my awareness, I will see a world of peace and safety and joy. And it
is this that I choose to see, in place of what I look on now.

\[24\] I do not perceive my own best interests**.**

^5^ How could I recognize my own best interests when I do not know who I
am? What I think are my best interests would merely bind me closer to
the world of illusions. I am willing to follow the Guide God has given
me to find out what my own best interests are, recognizing that I cannot
perceive them by myself.

\[25\] I do not know what anything is for.
:::

^6^ To me, the purpose of everything is to prove that my illusions about
myself are real. It is for that purpose that I attempt to use everyone
and everything. It is this that I believe the world is for. Therefore I
do not recognize its real purpose. The purpose I have given the world
has led to a frightening picture of it. Let me open my mind to its real
purpose by withdrawing the one I have given it, and learning the truth
about it.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 56**](#part0004.html#level-324) {#part0040_split_006.html#h1-324 .level1}

^1^ Our review for today covers the following:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[26\] My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.

^2^ How can I know who I am when I see myself as under constant attack?
Pain, illness, loss, age, and death seem to threaten me. All my hopes
and wishes and plans appear to be at the mercy of a world I cannot
control. Yet perfect security and complete fulfilment are my
inheritance. I have tried to give my inheritance away in exchange for
the world I see. But God has kept my inheritance safe for me. My own
real thoughts will teach me what it is.

\[27\] Above all else I want to see.

^3^ Recognizing that what I see reflects what I think I am, I realize
that vision is my greatest need. The world I see attests to the fearful
nature of the self-image I have made. If I would remember who I am, it
is essential that I let this image of myself go. As it is replaced by
truth, vision will surely be given me. And with this vision, I will look
upon the world and upon myself with charity and love.

\[28\] Above all else I want to see differently.

^4^ The world I see holds my fearful self-image in place, and guarantees
its continuance. While I see the world as I see it now, truth cannot
enter my awareness. I would let the door behind this world be opened for
me that I may look past it to the world that reflects the Love of God.

\[29\] God is in everything I see.

^5^ Behind every image I have made, the truth remains unchanged. Behind
every veil I have drawn across the face of love, its light remains
undimmed. Beyond all my insane wishes is my will united with the Will of
my Father. God is still everywhere and in everything forever. And we who
are part of Him will yet look past all appearances and recognize the
truth beyond them all.

\[30\] God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.

^6^ In my own mind, behind all my insane thoughts of separation and
attack, is the knowledge that all is one forever. I have not lost the
knowledge of who I am because I have forgotten it. It has been kept for
me in the Mind of God, Who has not left His Thoughts. And I, who am
among them, am one with them and one with Him.
:::
:::

[]{#part0040_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 57**](#part0004.html#level-325) {#part0040_split_007.html#h1-325 .level1}

^1^ Today let us review these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[31\] I am not the victim of the world I see.

^2^ How can I be the victim of a world that can be completely undone if
I so choose? My chains are loosened. I can drop them off merely by
desiring to do so. The prison door is open. I can leave it simply by
walking out. Nothing holds me in this world. Only my wish to stay keeps
me a prisoner. I would give up my insane wishes and walk into the
sunlight at last.

\[32\] I have invented the world I see.

^3^ I made up the prison in which I see myself. All I need do is
recognize this, and I am free. I have deluded myself into believing it
is possible to imprison the Son of God. I was bitterly mistaken in this
belief, which I no longer want. The Son of God must be forever free. He
is as God created him, and not what I would make of him. He is where God
would have him be, and not where I thought to hold him prisoner.

\[33\] There is another way of looking at the world.

^4^ Since the purpose of the world is not the one I ascribed to it,
there must be another way of looking at it. I see everything upside
down, and my thoughts are the opposite of truth. I see the world as a
prison for God's Son. It must be, then, that the world is really a place
where he can be set free. I would look upon the world as it is, and see
it as a place where the Son of God finds his freedom.

\[34\] I could see peace instead of this.

^5^ When I see the world as a place of freedom, I will realize that it
reflects the laws of God instead of the rules which I made up for it to
obey. I will understand that peace, not war, abides in it. And I will
perceive that peace also abides in the hearts of all who share this
place with me.

\[35\] My mind is part of God's. I am very holy.

^6^ As I share the peace of the world with my brothers, I begin to
understand that this peace comes from deep within myself. The world I
look upon has taken on the light of my forgiveness and shines
forgiveness back at me. In this light, I begin to see what my illusions
about myself had kept hidden. I begin to understand the holiness of all
living things including myself, and their oneness with me.
:::
:::

[]{#part0040_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 58**](#part0004.html#level-326) {#part0040_split_008.html#h1-326 .level1}

^1^ These ideas are for review today:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[36\] My holiness envelops everything I see.

^2^ From my holiness does the perception of the real world come. Having
forgiven, I no longer see myself as guilty. I can accept the innocence
that is the truth about me. Seen through understanding eyes, the
holiness of the world is all I see, for I can picture only the thoughts
I hold about myself.

\[37\] My holiness blesses the world.

^3^ The perception of my holiness does not bless me alone. Everyone and
everything I see in its light shares in the joy it brings to me. There
is nothing that is apart from this joy because there is nothing that
does not share my holiness. As I recognize my holiness, so does the
holiness of the world shine forth for everyone to see.

\[38\] There is nothing my holiness cannot do.

^4^ My holiness is unlimited in its power to heal because it is
unlimited in its power to save. What is there to be saved from except
illusions? And what are all illusions except false ideas about myself?
My holiness undoes them all by asserting the truth about me. In the
presence of my holiness, which I share with God Himself, all idols
vanish.

\[39\] My holiness is my salvation.

^5^ Since my holiness saves me from all guilt, recognizing my holiness
is recognizing my salvation. It is also recognizing the salvation of the
world. Once I have accepted my holiness, nothing can make me afraid. And
because I am unafraid, everyone must share in my understanding, which is
the gift of God to me and to the world.

\[40\] I am blessed as a Son of God.
:::

^6^ Herein lies my claim to all good and only good. I am blessed as a
Son of God. All good things are mine because God intended them for me. I
cannot suffer any loss or deprivation or pain because of who I am. My
Father supports me, protects me, and directs me in all things. His care
for me is infinite and is with me forever. I am eternally blessed as His
Son.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 59**](#part0004.html#level-327) {#part0040_split_009.html#h1-327 .level1}

^1^ The following ideas are for review today:

::: {.pull-quote}
**\[41\] God goes with me wherever I go.**

^2^ How can I be alone when God always goes with me? How can I be
doubtful and unsure of myself when perfect certainty abides in Him? How
can I be disturbed by anything when He rests in me in absolute peace?
How can I suffer when love and joy surround me through Him? Let me not
cherish illusions about myself. I am perfect because God goes with me
wherever I go.

**\[42\] God is my strength. Vision is His gift.**

^3^ Let me not look to my own eyes to see today. Let me be willing to
exchange my pitiful illusion of seeing for the vision that is given by
God. Christ's vision is His gift, and He has given it to me. Let me call
upon this gift today, so that this day may help me to understand
eternity.

**\[43\] God is my Source. I cannot see apart from Him.**

^4^ I can see what God wants me to see. I cannot see anything else.
Beyond His Will lie only illusions. It is these I choose when I think I
can see apart from Him. It is these I choose when I try to see through
the body's eyes. Yet the vision of Christ has been given me to replace
them. It is through this vision that I choose to see.

**\[44\] God is the Light in which I see.**

^5^ I cannot see in darkness. God is the only Light. Therefore if I am
to see, it must be through Him. I have tried to define what seeing is,
and I have been wrong. Now it is given me to understand that God is the
Light in which I see. Let me welcome vision and the happy world it will
show me.

**\[45\] God is the Mind with which I think.**
:::

^6^ I have no thoughts I do not share with God. I have no thoughts apart
from Him because I have no mind apart from His. As part of His Mind, my
thoughts are His and His Thoughts are mine.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 60**](#part0004.html#level-328) {#part0040_split_010.html#h1-328 .level1}

^1^ These ideas are for today's review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[46\] God is the Love in which I forgive.

^2^ God does not forgive because He has never condemned. The blameless
cannot blame, and those who have accepted their innocence see nothing to
forgive. Yet forgiveness is the means by which I will recognize my
innocence. It is the reflection of God's Love on earth. It will bring me
near enough to Heaven that the Love of God can reach down to me and
raise me to my home.

\[47\] God is the Strength in which I trust.

^3^ It is not my own strength through which I forgive. It is through the
strength of God in me, which I am remembering as I forgive. As I begin
to see, I recognize His reflection on earth. I forgive all things
because I feel the stirring of His strength in me. And I begin to
remember the Love I chose to forget, but Which has not forgotten me.

\[48\] There is nothing to fear.

^4^ How safe the world will look to me when I can see it! It will not
look anything like what I imagine I see now. Everyone and everything I
see will lean toward me to bless me. I will recognize in everyone my
dearest Friend. What could there be to fear in a world which I have
forgiven and which has forgiven me?

\[49\] God's Voice speaks to me all through the day.

^5^ There is not a moment in which God's Voice ceases to call on my
forgiveness to save me. There is not a moment in which His Voice fails
to direct my thoughts, guide my actions, and lead my feet. I am walking
steadily on toward truth. There is nowhere else I can go because God's
Voice is the only voice and the only guide that has been given to His
Son.

\[50\] I am sustained by the Love of God.
:::

^6^ As I listen to God's Voice, I am sustained by His Love. As I open my
eyes, His Love lights up the world for me to see. As I forgive, His Love
reminds me that His Son is sinless. And as I look upon the world with
the vision He has given me, I remember that I am His Son.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 61 I am the light of the world**](#part0004.html#level-329) {#part0040_split_011.html#h1-329 .level1}

^1^ Who is the light of the world except God's Son? This, then, is
merely a statement of the truth about yourself. It is the opposite of a
statement of pride, of arrogance, or of self-deception. It does not
describe the self-concept you have made. It does not refer to any of the
characteristics with which you have endowed your idols. It refers to you
as you were created by God. It simply states the truth.

^2^ To the ego, today's idea is the epitome of self-glorification. But
the ego does not understand humility, mistaking it for self-debasement.
Humility consists of accepting your role in salvation and in taking no
other. It is not humility to insist that you cannot be the light of the
world if that is the function God assigned to you. It is only arrogance
that would assert this function cannot be for you, and arrogance is
always of the ego.

^3^ True humility requires that you accept today's idea because it is
God's Voice Which tells you it is true. This is a beginning step in
accepting your real function on earth. It is a giant stride toward
taking your rightful place in salvation. It is a positive assertion of
your right to be saved and an acknowledgment of the power that is given
you to save others.

^4^ You will want to think about this idea as often as possible today.
It is the perfect answer to all illusions and therefore to all
temptation. It brings all the images you have made about yourself to the
truth and helps you depart in peace, unburdened and certain of your
purpose.

^5^ As many practice periods as possible should be undertaken today,
although each one need not exceed a minute or two. They should begin
with telling yourself:

*^6^ I am the light of the world.\
That is my only function.\
That is why I am here.*

^7^ Then think about these statements for a short while, preferably with
your eyes closed if the situation permits. Let a few related thoughts
come to you, and repeat the idea to yourself if your mind wanders away
from the central thought.

^8^ Be sure both to begin and end the day with a practice period. Thus
you will awaken with an acknowledgment of the truth about yourself,
reinforce it throughout the day, and turn to sleep as you reaffirm your
function and your only purpose here. These two practice periods may be
longer than the rest if you find them helpful and want to extend them.

^9^ Today's idea goes far beyond the ego's petty views of what you are
and what your purpose is. As a bringer of salvation, this is obviously
necessary. This is the first of a number of giant steps we will take in
the next few weeks. Try today to begin to build a firm foundation for
these advances.

^10^ You are the light of the world. God has built His plan for the
salvation of His Son on you
:::

[]{#part0040_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 62 Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world**](#part0004.html#level-330) {#part0040_split_012.html#h1-330 .level1}

^1^ It is your forgiveness that will bring the world of darkness to the
light. It is your forgiveness that lets you recognize the light in which
you see. Forgiveness is the demonstration that you are the light of the
world. Through your forgiveness does the truth about yourself return to
your memory. Therefore in your forgiveness lies your salvation.

^2^ Illusions about yourself and the world are one. That is why all
forgiveness is a gift to yourself. Your goal is to find out who you are,
having denied your identity by attacking creation and its Creator. Now
you are learning how to remember the truth. For this, attack must be
replaced by forgiveness so that thoughts of life may replace thoughts of
death.

^3^ Remember that in every attack you call upon your own weakness, while
every time you forgive you call upon the strength of Christ in you. Do
you not then begin to understand what forgiveness will do for you? It
will remove all sense of weakness, strain, and fatigue from your mind.
It will take away all fear and guilt and pain. It will restore the
invulnerability and power God gave His Son to your awareness.

^4^ Let us be glad to begin and end this day by practicing today's idea
and to use it as frequently as possible throughout the day. It will help
to make the day as happy for you as God wants you to be. And it will
help those around you as well as those who seem to be far away in space
and time to share this happiness with you.

^5^ As often as you can, closing your eyes if possible, say to yourself:

*^6^ Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world.\
I would fulfil my function that I may be happy.*

^7^ Then devote a minute or two to considering your function and the
happiness and release it will bring you.

^8^ Let related thoughts come freely, for your heart will recognize
these words, and in your mind is the awareness that they are true.
Should your attention wander, repeat the idea and add:

*^9^ I would remember this because I want to be happy.*
:::

[]{#part0040_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 63 The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my forgiveness**](#part0004.html#level-331) {#part0040_split_013.html#h1-331 .level1}

^1^ How holy are you who have the power to bring peace to every mind!
How blessed are you who can learn to recognize the means for letting
this be done through you! What purpose could you have that would bring
you greater happiness?

^2^ You are indeed the light of the world with such a function. The Son
of God looks to you for his redemption. It is yours to give him, for it
belongs to you. Accept no trivial purpose or meaningless desire in its
place, or you will forget your function and leave the Son of God in
hell. This is no idle request that is being asked of you. You are asked
to accept salvation that it may be yours to give.

^3^ Recognizing the importance of this function, we will be happy to
remember it very often today. We will begin the day by acknowledging it
and close the day with the thought of it in our awareness. And
throughout the day, we will repeat this as often as we can:

*^4^ The light of the world brings peace to every\
mind through my forgiveness.\
I am the means God has appointed for the salvation of the world.*

^5^ You will probably find it easier to let the related thoughts come to
you in the minute or two which you should devote to considering this if
you can close your eyes. Do not, however, wait for such an opportunity.
No chance should be lost for reinforcing today's idea.

^6^ Remember that God's Son looks to you for his salvation. And who but
your Self must be His Son?
:::

[]{#part0040_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 64 Let me not forget my function**](#part0004.html#level-332) {#part0040_split_014.html#h1-332 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea is merely another way of saying, "Let me not wander
into temptation." The purpose of the world you see is to obscure your
function of forgiveness and provide you with a justification for
forgetting it. It is the temptation to abandon God and His Son, taking
on a physical appearance. It is this which the body's eyes look upon.

^2^ Nothing the body's eyes seem to see can be anything but a form of
temptation, since this was the purpose of the body itself. Yet we have
learned that the Holy Spirit has another use for all the illusions you
have made, and therefore He sees another purpose in them. To the Holy
Spirit, the world is a place where you learn to forgive yourself what
you think of as your sins. In this perception, the physical appearance
of temptation becomes the spiritual recognition of salvation.

^3^ To review our last few lessons, your function here is to be the
light of the world, a function given you by God. It is only the
arrogance of the ego that leads you to question this and only the fear
of the ego that induces you to regard yourself as unworthy of the task
assigned to you by God Himself.

^4^ The world's salvation awaits your forgiveness, because through it
does the Son of God escape from all illusions and thus from all
temptation. The Son of God is you. Only by fulfilling the function given
you by God will you be happy. That is because your function is to be
happy by using the means by which happiness becomes inevitable.

^5^ There is no other way. Therefore every time you choose whether or
not to fulfil your function, you are really choosing whether to be happy
or not. Let us remember this today. Let us remind ourselves of it in the
morning and again at night and all through the day as well.

^6^ Prepare yourself in advance for all the decisions you will make
today by remembering that they are all really very simple. Each one will
lead to happiness or unhappiness. Can such a simple decision really be
difficult to make? Let not the form of the decision deceive you.
Complexity of form does not imply complexity of content. It is
impossible that any decision on earth can have a content different from
just this one simple choice. That is the only choice the Holy Spirit
sees. Therefore it is the only choice there is.

^7^ Today, then, let us practice with these thoughts:

*^8^ Let me not forget my function.\
Let me not try to substitute mine for God's.\
Let me forgive and be happy.*

^9^ At least once devote ten or 15 minutes to reflecting on this with
closed eyes. Related thoughts will come to help you if you remember the
crucial importance of your function to you and to the world.

^10^ In the frequent applications of today's idea to be made throughout
the day, devote several minutes to reviewing these thoughts and then to
thinking about them and about nothing else. This will be difficult at
first, particularly since you are not proficient in the mind discipline
which it requires. You may need to repeat "Let me not forget my
function" quite often, to help you concentrate.

^11^ Two forms of shorter practice periods are required. At times, do
the exercises with your eyes closed, trying to concentrate on the
thoughts you are applying. At other times keep your eyes open after
reviewing the thoughts and look slowly and unselectively about you,
telling yourself:

*^12^ This is the world it is my function to save.*
:::

[]{#part0040_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 65 My only function is the one God gave me**](#part0004.html#level-333) {#part0040_split_015.html#h1-333 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today reaffirms your commitment to salvation. It also
reminds you that you have no function other than this. Both of these
thoughts are obviously necessary for a total commitment. Salvation
cannot be the only purpose you hold while you still cherish others. The
full acceptance of salvation as your only function necessarily entails
two phases; the recognition of salvation as your function, and the
relinquishment of all the other goals you have invented for yourself.
This is the only way in which you can take your rightful place among the
saviors of the world. This is the only way in which you can say and
mean, "My only function is the one God gave me." This is the only way in
which you can find peace of mind.

^2^ Today and for a number of days to follow, set aside ten to 15
minutes for a more sustained practice period in which you try to
understand and accept what today's idea really means. It offers you
escape from all your perceived difficulties. It places the key to the
door of peace, which you have closed upon yourself, in your own hands.
It gives you the answer to all the searching you have done since time
began.

^3^ Try, if possible, to undertake the daily extended practice periods
at approximately the same time each day. Try, also, to determine this
time today in advance and then adhere to it as closely as possible.

^4^ The purpose of this is to arrange your day so that you have set
apart the time for God, as well as for all the trivial purposes and
goals you will pursue. This is part of the long range disciplinary
training which your mind needs, so that the Holy Spirit can use it
consistently for the purpose He shares with you.

^5^ For this longer practice period, begin by reviewing the idea for
today. Then close your eyes, repeat the idea to yourself once again, and
watch your mind carefully to catch whatever thoughts cross it.

^6^ At first, make no attempt to concentrate only on thoughts related to
the idea for today. Rather, try to uncover each thought that arises to
interfere with it. Note each one as it comes to you with as little
involvement or concern as possible, dismissing each one by telling
yourself:

*^7^ This thought reflects a goal that is preventing me\
from accepting my only function.*

^8^ After a while, interfering thoughts will become harder to find. Try,
however, to continue a minute or so longer, attempting to catch a few of
the idle thoughts which escaped your attention before, but do not strain
or make undue effort in doing this. Then tell yourself:

*^9^ On this clean slate, let my true function be written for me.*

^10^ You need not use these exact words, but try to get a sense of being
willing to have your illusions of purpose be replaced by truth.

^11^ Finally, repeat the idea for today once more and devote the rest of
the practice period to trying to focus on its importance to you, the
relief its acceptance will bring you by resolving your conflicts once
and for all, and the extent to which you really want salvation in spite
of your own foolish ideas to the contrary.

^12^ In the shorter practice periods, which should be undertaken at
least once an hour, use this form in applying today's idea:

*^13^ My only function is the one God gave me.\
I want no other and I have no other.*

^14^ Sometimes close your eyes as you practice, and sometimes keep them
open and look about you. It is what you see now that will be totally
changed when you accept today's idea completely.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 66 My happiness and my function are one**](#part0004.html#level-334) {#part0040_split_016.html#h1-334 .level1}

^1^ You have surely noticed an emphasis throughout our recent lessons on
the connection between fulfilling your function and achieving happiness.
This is because you do not really see the connection. Yet there is more
than just a connection between them; they are the same. Their forms are
different, but their content is completely one.

^2^ The ego does constant battle with the Holy Spirit on the fundamental
question of what your function is. So does it do constant battle with
the Holy Spirit about what your happiness is. It is not a two-way
battle. The ego attacks and the Holy Spirit does not respond. He knows
what your function is. He knows that it is your happiness.

^3^ Today we will try to go past this wholly meaningless battle and
arrive at the truth about your function. We will not engage in ceaseless
arguments about what it is. We will not become hopelessly involved in
defining happiness and determining the means for achieving it. We will
not indulge the ego by listening to its attacks on truth. We will merely
be glad that we can find out what truth is.

^4^ Our longer practice period today has as its purpose your acceptance
of the fact that not only is there a very real connection between the
function God gave you and your happiness, but that they are actually
identical. God gives you only happiness. Therefore the function He gave
you must be happiness, even if it appears to be different. Today's
exercises are an attempt to go beyond these differences in appearance,
and recognize a common content where it exists in truth.

^5^ Begin the ten- to 15-minute practice period by reviewing these
thoughts:

*^6^ God gives me only happiness.\
He has given my function to me.\
Therefore my function must be happiness.*

^7^ Try to see the logic in this sequence, even if you do not yet accept
the conclusion. It is only if the first two thoughts are wrong that the
conclusion could be false. Let us, then, think about the premises for a
while, as we are practicing.

^8^ The first premise is that God gives you only happiness. This could
be false, of course, but in order to be false it is necessary to define
God as something He is not. Love cannot give evil, and what is not
happiness is evil. God cannot give what He does not have, and He cannot
have what He is not. Unless God gives you only happiness, He must be
evil. And it is this definition of Him which you are believing if you do
not accept the first premise.

^9^ The second premise is that God has given you your function. We have
seen that there are only two parts of your mind. One is ruled by the ego
and is made up of illusions. The other is the home of the Holy Spirit,
where truth abides. There are no other guides but these to choose
between and no other outcomes possible as a result of your choice but
the fear which the ego always engenders and the love which the Holy
Spirit always offers to replace it.

^10^ Thus it must be that your function is established by God through
His Voice or is made by the ego which you have made to replace Him.
Which is true? Unless God gave your function to you, it must be the gift
of the ego. Does the ego really have gifts to give, being itself an
illusion and offering only the illusion of gifts?

^11^ Think about this during the longer practice period today. Think
also about the many forms which the illusion of your function has taken
in your mind and the many ways in which you try to find salvation under
the ego's guidance. Did you find it? Were you happy? Did they bring you
peace?

^12^ We need great honesty today. Remember the outcomes fairly, and
consider also whether it was ever reasonable to expect happiness from
anything the ego has ever proposed. Yet the ego is the only alternative
to the Holy Spirit's Voice. You will listen to madness or hear the
truth. Try to make this choice as you think about the premises on which
our conclusion rests. We can share in this conclusion, but in no other.
For God Himself shares it with us.

^13^ Today's idea is another giant stride in the perception of the same
as the same and the different as different. On one side stand all
illusions. All truth stands on the other. Let us try today to realize
that only the truth is true.

^14^ In the shorter practice periods, which would be most helpful today
if undertaken twice an hour, this form of the application is suggested:

*^15^ My happiness and function are one\
because God has given me both.*

^16^ It will not take more than a minute, and probably less, to repeat
these words slowly and think about them a little as you say them.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 67 Love created me like Itself**](#part0004.html#level-335) {#part0040_split_017.html#h1-335 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea is a complete and accurate statement of what you are.
This is why you are the light of the world. This is why God appointed
you as the world's savior. This is why the Son of God looks to you for
his salvation. He is saved by what you are.

^2^ We will make every effort today to reach this truth about you and to
realize fully, if only for a moment, that it is the truth. In the longer
practice period, we will think about your reality and its wholly
unchanged and unchangeable nature. We will begin by repeating this truth
about you and then spend a few minutes adding some relevant thoughts,
such as:

*^3^ Holiness created me holy.\
Kindness created me kind.\
Helpfulness created me helpful.\
Perfection created me perfect.*

^4^ Any attribute which is in accord with God as He defines Himself is
appropriate for use. We are trying today to undo your definition of God
and replace it with His own. We are also trying to emphasize that you
are part of His definition of Himself.

^5^ After you have gone over several such related thoughts, try to let
all thoughts drop away for a brief preparatory interval, and then try to
reach past all your images and preconceptions about yourself to the
truth in you. If Love created you like Itself, this Self must be in you.
And somewhere in your mind, It is there for you to find.

^6^ You may find it necessary to repeat the idea for today from time to
time to replace distracting thoughts. You may also find that this is not
sufficient and that you need to continue adding other thoughts related
to the truth about yourself. Yet perhaps you will succeed in going past
that and through the interval of thoughtlessness to the awareness of a
blazing light in which you recognize yourself as Love created you. Be
confident that you will do much today to bring that awareness nearer,
whether you feel you have succeeded or not.

^7^ It will be particularly helpful today to practice the idea for today
as often as you can. You need to hear the truth about yourself as
frequently as possible because your mind is so preoccupied with false
self-images. Four or five times an hour, and perhaps even more, it would
be most beneficial to remind yourself that Love created you like Itself.
Hear the truth about yourself in this.

^8^ Try to realize in the shorter practice periods that this is not your
tiny solitary voice that tells you this. This is the Voice for God
reminding you of your Father and of your Self. This is the Voice of
truth replacing everything that the ego tells you about yourself with
the simple truth about the Son of God. You were created by Love like
Itself.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 68 Love holds no grievances**](#part0004.html#level-336) {#part0040_split_018.html#h1-336 .level1}

^1^ You who were created by Love like Itself can hold no grievances and
know your Self. To hold a grievance is to forget who you are. To hold a
grievance is to see yourself as a body. It is the decision to let the
ego rule your mind and to condemn the body to death.

^2^ Perhaps you do not yet fully realize just what holding grievances
does to your awareness. It seems to split you off from your Source and
make you unlike Him. It makes you believe that He is like what you think
you have become, for no one can conceive of his Creator as unlike
himself.

^3^ Shut off from your Self, Who remains aware of His likeness to His
Creator, your Self seems to sleep, while the part of your mind that
weaves illusions in its sleep appears to be awake. Can all this arise
from holding grievances? Oh, yes! For he who holds grievances denies he
was created by Love, and his Creator has become fearful to him in his
dream of hate. Who can dream of hatred and not fear God?

^4^ It is as sure that those who hold grievances will redefine God in
their own image as it is certain that God created them like Himself and
defined them as part of Him. It is as sure that those who hold
grievances will suffer guilt as it is certain that those who forgive
will find peace. It is as sure that those who hold grievances will
forget who they are as it is certain that those who forgive will
remember. Would you not be willing to relinquish your grievances if you
believed all this were so?

^5^ Perhaps you do not think you can let all your grievances go. That,
however, is simply a question of motivation. Today we will try to find
out how you would feel without them. If you succeed even by ever so
little, there will never be a problem in motivation ever again.

^6^ Begin today's extended practice period by searching your mind for
those against whom you hold what you regard as major grievances. Some of
these will be quite easy to find. Then think of the seemingly minor
grievances you hold against those you like and even think you love. It
will quickly become apparent that there is no one against whom you do
not cherish grievances of some sort. This has left you alone in all the
universe in your perception of yourself.

^7^ Determine now to see all these people as friends. Say to them all
collectively, thinking of each one in turn as you do so:

*^8^ I would see you as my friend\
that I may remember you are part of me\
and come to know myself.*

^9^ Spend the remainder of the practice period trying to think of
yourself as completely at peace with everyone and everything, safe in a
world which protects you and loves you and which you love in return. Try
to feel safety surrounding you, hovering over you, and holding you up.
Try to believe, however briefly, that nothing can harm you in any way.
At the end of the practice period tell yourself:

*^10^ Love holds no grievances.\
When I let all my grievances go,\
I will know I am perfectly safe.*

^11^ The short practice periods should include a quick application of
today's idea in this form, whenever any thought of grievance arises
against anyone, physically present or not:

*^12^ Love holds no grievances.\
Let me not betray my Self.*

^13^ In addition, repeat the idea several times an hour in this form:

*^14^ Love holds no grievances.\
I would wake to my Self by laying all my\
grievances aside and wakening in Him.*
:::

[]{#part0040_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 69 My grievances hide the light of the world in me**](#part0004.html#level-337) {#part0040_split_019.html#h1-337 .level1}

^1^ No one can look upon what your grievances conceal. Because your
grievances are hiding the light of the world in you, everyone stands in
darkness, and you beside him. But as the veil of your grievances is
lifted, you are released with him. Share your salvation now with him who
stood beside you when you were in hell. He is your brother in the light
of the world which saves you both.

^2^ Today let us make another real attempt to reach the light in you.
Before we undertake this in our more extended practice period, let us
devote several minutes in thinking about what we are trying to do. We
are literally attempting to get in touch with the salvation of the
world. We are trying to see past the veil of darkness that keeps it
concealed. We are trying to let the veil be lifted and see the tears of
God's Son disappear in the sunlight.

^3^ Let us begin our longer practice period today with the full
realization of all this and real determination to reach what is dearer
to us than all else. Salvation is our only need. There is no other
purpose here and no other function to fulfill. Learning salvation is our
only goal. Let us end the ancient search today by finding the light in
us and holding it up for everyone who searches with us to look upon and
rejoice.

^4^ Very quietly now, with your eyes closed, try to let go of all the
content which generally occupies your consciousness. Think of your mind
as a vast round area, surrounded by a layer of heavy dark clouds. You
can see only the clouds because you seem to be standing outside the
whole area, and quite apart from it.

^5^ From where you stand, you can see no reason to believe there is a
brilliant light hidden by the clouds. The clouds seem to be the only
reality. They seem to be all there is to see. Therefore you do not
attempt to go through them and past them, which is the only way in which
you would be really convinced of their lack of substance. We will make
this attempt today.

^6^ After you have thought about the importance of what you are trying
to do for yourself and the world, try to settle down in perfect
stillness, remembering only how much you want to reach the light in you
today-now. Determine to go past the clouds. Reach out and touch them in
your mind; brush them aside with your hand; feel them resting on your
cheeks and forehead and eyelids as you go through them. Go on; clouds
cannot stop you.

^7^ If you are doing the exercises properly, you will begin to feel a
sense of being lifted up and carried ahead. Your little effort and small
determination call on the power of the universe to help you, and God
Himself will raise you from darkness into light. You are in accord with
His Will. You cannot fail because your will is His.

^8^ Have confidence in your Father today. And be certain that He has
heard you and has answered you. You may not recognize His answer yet,
but you can indeed be sure that it is given you, and you will yet
receive it. Try, as you attempt to go through the clouds to the light,
to hold this confidence in your mind. Try to remember that you are at
last joining your will to God's. Try to keep the thought clearly in mind
that what you undertake with God must succeed. Then let the power of God
work in you and through you, that His Will and yours may be done.

^9^ In the shorter practice periods, which you will want to do as often
as possible in view of the importance of today's idea to you and your
happiness, remind yourself that your grievances are hiding the light of
the world from your awareness. Remind yourself also that you are not
searching for it alone and that you do know where to look for it. Say,
then:

*^10^ My grievances hide the light of the world in me.\
I cannot see what I have hidden.\
Yet I want to let it be revealed to me\
for my salvation and the salvation of the world.*

^11^ Also, be sure to tell yourself:

*^12^ If I hold this grievance, the light of the world\
will be hidden from me,*

^13^ if you are tempted to hold anything against anyone today.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 70 My salvation comes from me**](#part0004.html#level-338) {#part0040_split_020.html#h1-338 .level1}

^1^ All temptation is nothing more than some form of the basic
temptation not to believe the idea for today. Salvation seems to come
from anywhere except from you. So, too, does the source of guilt. You
see neither guilt nor salvation as in your own mind and nowhere else.
When you realize that all guilt is solely an invention of your mind, you
must also realize that guilt and salvation must be in the same place.
Understanding this, you are saved.

^2^ The seeming "cost" of accepting today's idea is this: it means that
nothing outside yourself can save you; nothing outside yourself can give
you peace. But it also means that nothing outside yourself can hurt you
or disturb your peace or upset you in any way.

^3^ Today's idea places you in charge of the universe, where you belong
because of who you are. This is not a role which can be partially
accepted. And you must surely begin to see that accepting it is
salvation. It may not, however, be clear to you why the recognition that
guilt is in your own mind entails the realization that salvation is
there as well.

^4^ God would not have put the remedy for sickness where it cannot help.
That is the way your mind has worked, but hardly His. He wants you to be
healed, and so He has kept the Source of healing where the need for
healing lies. You have tried to do just the opposite, making every
attempt, however distorted and fantastic it might be, to separate
healing from the sickness for which it was intended and thus keep the
sickness.

^5^ Your purpose was to ensure that healing did not occur; God's purpose
was to ensure that it did. Today we practice realizing that God's Will
and ours are really the same in this.

^6^ God wants us to be healed, and we do not really want to be sick
because it makes us unhappy. Therefore, in accepting the idea for today,
we are in agreement with God. He does not want us to be sick. Neither do
we. He wants us to be healed. So do we.

^7^ We are ready for two longer practice periods today, each of which
should last some ten to 15 minutes. We will, however, still let you
decide when to undertake them. We will follow this practice for a number
of lessons, and it would again be well to decide in advance when would
be a good time to lay aside for each of them and adhere to your own
decision as closely as possible.

^8^ Begin these practice periods by repeating the idea for today, adding
a statement signifying your recognition that salvation comes from
nothing outside of you. You might put it this way:

*^9^ My salvation comes from me.\
It cannot come from anywhere else.*

^10^ Then devote a few minutes with your eyes closed to reviewing some
of the external places where you have looked for salvation in the
past-in other people, in possessions, in various situations and events,
and in self-concepts which you sought to make real. Recognize that it
was not there. Tell yourself:

*^11^ My salvation cannot come from any of these things.\
My salvation comes from me, and only from me.*

^12^ Now we will try again to reach the light in you, which is where
your salvation is. You cannot find it in the clouds that surround the
light, and it is in them you have been looking for it. It is not there.
It is past the clouds and in the light beyond. Remember that you will
have to go through the clouds before you can reach the light. But
remember also that you have never found anything in the cloud patterns
you imagined that endured or that you wanted.

^13^ Since all illusions of salvation have failed you, surely you do not
want to remain in the clouds looking vainly for idols there when you
could so easily walk on into the light of real salvation. Try to pass
the clouds by whatever means appeals to you. If it helps you, think of
me holding your hand and leading you. And I assure you this will be no
idle fantasy.

^14^ For the short and frequent practice periods today, remind yourself
that your salvation comes from you and nothing but your own thoughts can
hamper your progress. You are free from all external interference. You
are in charge of your salvation. You are in charge of the salvation of
the world. Say, then:

*^15^ My salvation comes from me.\
Nothing outside of me can hold me back.\
Within me is the world's salvation and my own**.***
:::

[]{#part0040_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 71 Only God's plan for salvation will work**](#part0004.html#level-339) {#part0040_split_021.html#h1-339 .level1}

^1^ You may not realize that the ego has set up a plan for salvation in
opposition to God's. It is this plan in which you believe. Since it is
the opposite of God's, you also believe that to accept God's plan in
place of the ego's is to be damned. This sounds preposterous, of course.
Yet after we have considered just what the ego's plan is, perhaps you
will realize that, however preposterous it may be, you do believe it.

^2^ The ego's plan for salvation centers around holding grievances. It
maintains that if someone else spoke or acted differently, if some
external circumstance or event were changed, you would be saved. Thus
the source of salvation is constantly perceived as outside yourself.

^3^ Each grievance you hold is a declaration and an assertion in which
you believe that says, "If this were different, I would be saved." The
change of mind that is necessary for salvation is thus demanded of
everyone and everything except yourself.

^4^ The role assigned to your own mind in this plan, then, is simply to
determine what other than itself must change if you are to be saved.
According to this insane plan, any perceived source of salvation is
acceptable, provided that it will not work. This ensures that the
fruitless search will continue, for the illusion persists that, although
this hope has always failed, there are still grounds for hope in other
places and in other things. Another person will yet serve better;
another situation will yet offer success.

^5^ Such is the ego's plan for your salvation. Surely you can see how it
is in strict accord with the ego's basic doctrine, "Seek but do not
find." For what could more surely guarantee that you will not find
salvation than to channelize all your efforts in searching for it where
it is not?

^6^ God's plan for salvation works simply because, by following His
direction, you seek for salvation where it is. But if you are to
succeed, as God promises you will, you must be willing to seek there
only. Otherwise your purpose is divided, and you will attempt to follow
two plans for salvation which are diametrically opposed in all ways. The
result can only bring confusion, misery, and a deep sense of failure and
despair.

^7^ How can you escape all this? Very simply. The idea for today is the
answer. Only God's plan for salvation will work. There can be no real
conflict about this, because there is no possible alternative to God's
plan that will save you. His is the only plan that is certain in its
outcome. His is the only plan that must succeed.

^8^ Let us practice recognizing this certainty today. And let us rejoice
that there is an answer to what seems to be a conflict with no
resolution possible. All things are possible to God. Salvation must be
yours because of His plan, which cannot fail.

^9^ Begin the two longer practice periods for today by thinking about
today's idea and realizing that it contains two parts, each making equal
contribution to the whole. God's plan for your salvation will work, and
other plans will not. Do not allow yourself to become depressed or angry
at the second part; it is inherent in the first. And in the first is
your full release from all your own insane attempts and mad proposals to
free yourself. They have led to depression and anger. But God's plan
will succeed. It will lead to release and joy.

^10^ Remembering this, let us devote the remainder of the extended
practice periods to asking God to reveal His plan to us. Ask Him very
specifically:

*^11^ What would You have me do?\
Where would You have me go?\
What would You have me say, and to whom?*

^12^ Give Him full charge of the rest of the practice period, and let
Him tell you what needs to be done by you in His plan for your
salvation. He will answer you in proportion to your willingness to hear
His Voice. Refuse not to hear. The very fact that you are doing the
exercises proves that you have some willingness to listen. This is
enough to establish your claim to God's answer.

^13^ In the shorter practice periods tell yourself often that God's plan
for salvation, and only His, will work. Be alert to all temptation to
hold grievances today, and respond to them with this form of today's
idea:

*^14^ Holding grievances is the opposite of God's plan for\
Salvation. And only His plan will work.*

^15^ Try to remember the idea for today some six or seven times an hour.
There could be no better way to spend a half-minute or less than to
remember the Source of your salvation, and to see It where It is.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 72 Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation**](#part0004.html#level-340) {#part0040_split_022.html#h1-340 .level1}

^1^ While we have recognized that the ego's plan for salvation is the
opposite of God's, we have not yet emphasized that it is an active
attack on His plan and a deliberate attempt to destroy it. In the
attack, God is assigned the attributes which are actually associated
with the ego, while the ego appears to take on the attributes of God.

^2^ The ego's fundamental wish is to replace God. In fact, the ego is
the physical embodiment of this wish. For it is this wish which seems to
surround the mind with a body, keeping it separate and alone and unable
to reach other minds except through the body which was made to imprison
it. The limit on communication cannot be the best means to expand
communication. Yet the ego would have you believe that it is.

^3^ Although the attempt to keep the limitations which a body would
impose is obvious here, it is perhaps not so apparent why holding
grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation. But let us consider
the kinds of things which you are apt to hold grievances for. Are they
not always associated with something a body does? A person says
something we do not like; he does something that displeases us, he
"betrays" his hostile thoughts in his behavior.

^4^ We are not dealing here with what the person is. On the contrary, we
are exclusively concerned with what he does in a body. We are doing more
than failing to help in freeing him from its limitations. We are
actively trying to hold him to it by confusing it with him and judging
them as one. Herein is God attacked, for if His Son is only a body, so
must He be as well. A creator wholly unlike his creation is
inconceivable.

^5^If God is a body, what must His plan for salvation be? What could it
be but death? In trying to present Himself as the Author of life and not
of death, He is a liar and a deceiver, full of false promises and
offering illusions in place of truth.

^6^ The body's apparent reality makes this view of God quite convincing.
In fact, if the body were real, it would be difficult indeed to escape
this conclusion. And every grievance that you hold insists that the body
is real. It overlooks entirely what your brother is. It reinforces your
belief that he is a body and condemns him for it. And it asserts that
his salvation must be death, projecting this attack onto God and holding
Him responsible for it.

^7^ To this carefully prepared arena, where angry animals seek for prey
and mercy cannot enter, the ego comes to save you. God made you a body.
Very well. Let us accept this and be glad. As a body, do not let
yourself be deprived of what the body offers. Take the little you can
get. God gave you nothing. The body is your only savior. It is the death
of God and your salvation.

^8^ This is the universal belief of the world you see. Some hate the
body and try to hurt and humiliate it. Others love the body and try to
glorify and exalt it. But while it stands at the center of your concept
of yourself, you are attacking God's plan for salvation and holding your
grievances against Him and His creation that you may not hear the Voice
of truth and welcome it as Friend. Your chosen savior takes His place
instead. It is your friend; He is your enemy.

^9^ We will try today to stop these senseless attacks on salvation. We
will try to welcome it instead. Your upside-down perception has been
ruinous to your peace of mind. You have seen yourself in a body and the
truth outside you, locked away from your awareness by the body's
limitations. Now we are going to try to see this differently.

^10^ The light of truth is in us, where it was placed by God. It is the
body that is outside us and is not our concern. To be without a body is
to be in our natural state. To recognize the light of truth in us is to
recognize ourselves as we are. To see our Self as separate from the body
is to end the attack on God's plan for salvation and to accept it
instead. And wherever His plan is accepted, it is accomplished already.

^11^ Our goal in the longer practice periods today is to become aware
that God's plan for salvation has already been accomplished in us. To
achieve this goal, we must replace attack with acceptance. As long as we
attack it, we cannot understand what God's plan for us is. We are
therefore attacking what we do not recognize. Now we are going to try to
lay judgment aside and ask what God's plan for us is:

*^12^ What is salvation, Father?\
I do not know.\
Tell me, that I may understand**.***

^13^ Then we will wait in quiet for His answer.

^14^ We have attacked God's plan for salvation without waiting to hear
what it is. We have shouted our grievances so loudly that we have not
listened to His Voice. We have used our grievances to close our eyes and
stop our ears. Now we would see and hear and learn. "What is salvation,
Father?" Ask and you will be answered. Seek and you will find.

^15^ We are no longer asking the ego what salvation is and where to find
it. We are asking it of truth. Be certain, then, that the answer will be
true because of Whom you ask. Whenever you feel your confidence wane and
your hope of success flicker and go out, repeat your question and your
request, remembering that you are asking them of the infinite Creator of
infinity, Who created you like Himself:

*^16^ What is salvation, Father?\
I do not know.\
Tell me, that I may understand**.***

^17^ He will answer. Be determined to hear.

^18^ One or perhaps two shorter practice periods an hour will be enough
for today since they will be somewhat longer than usual. These exercises
begin with this:

*^19^ Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.\
Let me accept it instead.\
What is salvation, Father?*

^20^ Then wait a minute or so in silence, preferably with your eyes
closed, and listen for His answer.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 73 I will there be light**](#part0004.html#level-341) {#part0040_split_023.html#h1-341 .level1}

^1^ Today we are considering the will you share with God. This is not
the same as the ego's idle wishes, out of which darkness and nothingness
arise. The will you share with God has all the power of creation in it.
The ego's idle wishes are unshared and therefore have no power at all.
Its wishes are not idle in the sense that they can make a world of
illusions in which your belief can be very strong. But they are idle
indeed in terms of creation. They make nothing that is real.

^2^ Idle wishes and grievances are partners or co-makers in picturing
the world you see. The wishes of the ego gave rise to it, and the ego's
need for grievances, which are necessary to maintain it, peoples it with
figures that seem to attack you and call for "righteous" judgment. They
become the middlemen the ego employs to traffic in grievances and stand
between your awareness and your brothers' reality. Beholding them, you
do not know your brothers nor your Self.

^3^ Your will is lost to you in this strange bartering, in which guilt
is traded back and forth and grievances increase with each exchange. Can
such a world have been created by the will the Son of God shares with
his Father? Did God create disaster for His Son? Creation is the Will of
Both together. Would God create a world that kills Himself?

^4^ Today we will try once more to reach the world that is in accordance
with your will. The light is in it because it does not oppose the Will
of God. It is not Heaven, but the light of Heaven shines on it. Darkness
has vanished; the ego's idle wishes have been withdrawn.

^5^ Yet the light which shines upon this world reflects your will, and
so it must be in you that we will look for it. Your picture of the world
can only mirror what is within. The source of neither light nor darkness
can be found without. Grievances darken your mind, and you look out on a
darkened world. Forgiveness lifts the darkness, reasserts your will, and
lets you look upon a world of light.

^6^ We have repeatedly emphasized that the barrier of grievances is
easily passed and cannot stand between you and your salvation. The
reason is very simple. Do you really want to be in hell? Do you really
want to weep and suffer and die? Forget the ego's arguments which seek
to prove all this is really Heaven. You know it is not so. You cannot
want this for yourself. There is a point beyond which illusions cannot
go.

^7^ Suffering is not happiness, and it is happiness you really want.
Such is your will in truth. And so salvation is your will as well. You
want to succeed in what we are trying to do today. We undertake it with
your blessing and your glad accord.

^8^ We will succeed today if you remember that you will salvation for
yourself. You will to accept God's plan because you share in it. You
have no will that can really oppose it, and you do not want to do so.
Salvation is for you. Above all else you want the freedom to remember
who you really are.

^9^ Today it is the ego which stands powerless before your will. Your
will is free, and nothing can prevail against it. Therefore we undertake
the exercises for today in happy confidence, certain that we will find
what it is your will to find and remember what it is your will to
remember. No idle wishes can detain us nor deceive us with an illusion
of strength. Today let your will be done. And end forever the insane
belief that it is hell in place of Heaven that you choose.

^10^ We will begin our longer practice periods with the recognition that
God's plan for salvation, and only His, is wholly in accord with your
will. It is not the purpose of an alien power, thrust upon you
unwillingly. It is the one purpose here on which you and your Father are
in perfect accord.

^11^ You will succeed today, the time appointed for the release of the
Son of God from hell and from all idle wishes. His will is now restored
to his awareness. He is willing this very day to look upon the light in
him and be saved.

^12^ After reminding yourself of this and determining to keep your will
clearly in mind, tell yourself with gentle firmness and quiet certainty:

*^13^ I will there be light.\
Let me behold the light that reflects God's Will and mine.*

^14^ Then let your will assert itself, joined with the power of God and
united with your Self. Put the rest of the practice period under Their
guidance. Join with Them as They lead the way.

^15^ In the shorter practice periods, again make a declaration of what
you really want. Say:

*^16^ I will there be light.\
Darkness is not my will.*

^17^ This should be repeated several times an hour. It is most
important, however, to apply today's idea in this form immediately you
are tempted to hold a grievance of any kind. This will help you let your
grievances go instead of cherishing them and hiding them in the
darkness.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 74 There is no will but God's**](#part0004.html#level-342) {#part0040_split_024.html#h1-342 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today can be regarded as the central thought toward
which all our exercises are directed. God's is the only will. When you
have recognized this, you have recognized that your will is His. The
belief that conflict is possible has gone. Peace has replaced the
strange idea that you are torn by conflicting goals. As an expression of
the Will of God, you have no goal but His.

^2^ There is great peace in today's idea. And the exercises for today
are directed towards finding it. The idea itself is wholly true.
Therefore it cannot give rise to illusions. Without illusions, conflict
is impossible. Let us try to recognize this today and experience the
peace this recognition brings.

^3^ Begin the longer practice periods by repeating these thoughts
several times, slowly and with firm determination to understand what
they mean and to hold them in mind:

*^4^ There is no will but God's.\
I cannot be in conflict.*

^5^ Then spend several minutes in adding some related thoughts, such as:

*^6^ I am at peace.\
Nothing can disturb me. My will is God's.\
My will and God's are one.\
God wills peace for His Son.*

^7^ During this introductory phase, be sure to deal quickly with any
conflict thoughts that may cross your mind. Tell yourself immediately:

*^8^ There is no will but God's.\
These conflict thoughts are meaningless.*

^9^ If there is one conflict area which seems particularly difficult to
resolve, single it out for special consideration. Think about it briefly
but very specifically, identify the particular person or persons and the
situation or situations involved, and tell yourself:

*^10^ There is no will but God's.\
I share it with Him.\
My conflicts about \_\_\_\_\_ cannot be real.*

^11^ After you have cleared your mind in this way, close your eyes and
try to experience the peace to which your reality entitles you. Sink
into it, and feel it closing around you. There may be some temptation to
mistake these attempts for withdrawal, but the difference is easily
detected. If you are succeeding, you will feel a deep sense of joy and
an increased alertness rather than a feeling of drowsiness and
enervation. Joy characterizes peace. By this experience will you
recognize that you have reached it.

^12^ If you feel yourself slipping off into withdrawal, quickly repeat
the idea for today and try again. Do this as often as necessary. There
is definite gain in refusing to allow retreat into withdrawal, even if
you do not experience the peace you seek.

^13^ In the shorter periods, which should be undertaken at regular and
predetermined intervals today, say to yourself:

*^14^ There is no will but God's.\
I seek His peace today.*

^15^ Then try to find what you are seeking. A minute or two every
half-hour, with eyes closed if possible, would be well spent on this
today.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 75 The light has come**](#part0004.html#level-343) {#part0040_split_025.html#h1-343 .level1}

^1^ The light has come. You are healed and you can heal. The light has
come. You are saved, and you can save. You are at peace, and you bring
peace with you wherever you go. Darkness and turmoil and death have
disappeared. The light has come.

^2^ Today we celebrate the happy ending to your long dream of disaster.
There are no dark dreams now. The light has come. Today the time of
light begins for you and everyone. It is a new era in which a new world
is born. The old one has left no trace upon it in its passing. Today we
see a different world because the light has come.

^3^ Our exercises for today will be happy ones in which we offer thanks
for the passing of the old and the beginning of the new. No shadows from
the past remain to darken our sight and hide the world forgiveness
offers us. Today we will accept the new world as what we want to see. We
will be given what we desire. We will to see the light; the light has
come.

^4^ Our longer practice periods will be devoted to looking at the world
which our forgiveness shows us. This is what we want to see, and only
this. Our single purpose makes our goal inevitable. Today the real world
rises before us in gladness, to be seen at last. Sight is given us, now
that the light has come.

^5^ We do not see the ego's shadow on the world today. We see the light,
and in it we see Heaven's reflection lie across the world. Begin the
longer practice periods by telling yourself the glad tidings of your
release:

*^6^ The light has come. I have forgiven the world.*

^7^ Dwell not upon the past today. Keep a completely open mind, washed
of all past ideas and clean of every concept you have made. You have
forgiven the world today. You can look upon it now as if you never saw
it before. You do not know yet what it looks like. You merely wait to
have it shown to you. While you wait, repeat several times slowly and in
complete patience:

*^8^ The light has come. I have forgiven the world.*

^9^ Realize that your forgiveness entitles you to vision. Understand
that the Holy Spirit never fails to give the gift of sight to the
forgiving. Believe He will not fail you now. You have forgiven the
world. He will be with you as you watch and wait. He will show you what
true vision sees. It is His Will, and you have joined with Him. Wait
patiently for Him. He will be there. The light has come. You have
forgiven the world.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 76 I am under no laws but God's**](#part0004.html#level-344) {#part0040_split_026.html#h1-344 .level1}

^1^ We have observed before how many senseless things have seemed to you
to be salvation. Each has imprisoned you with laws as senseless as
itself. You are not bound by them. Yet to understand that this is so,
you must first realize salvation lies not there. While you would seek
for it in things that have no meaning, you bind yourself to laws that
make no sense. Thus do you seek to prove salvation is where it is not.

^2^ Today we will be glad you cannot prove it. For if you could, you
would forever seek where it is not and never find it. The idea for today
tells you once again how simple is salvation. Look for it where it waits
for you, and there it will be found. Look nowhere else, for it is
nowhere else.

^3^ Think of the freedom in the recognition that you are not bound by
all the strange and twisted laws which you have set up to save you. You
really think that you would starve unless you have stacks of green paper
strips and piles of metal discs. You really think a small round pellet
or some fluid pushed into your veins through a sharpened needle will
ward off death. You really think you are alone unless another body is
with you.

^4^ It is insanity that thinks these things. You call them laws, and put
them under different names in a long catalogue of rituals that have no
use and serve no purpose. You think you must obey the "laws" of
medicine, of economics, and of health. Protect the body, and you will be
saved.

^5^ These are not laws, but madness. The body is endangered by the mind
that hurts itself. The body suffers that the mind will fail to see it is
the victim of itself. The body's suffering is a mask the mind holds up
to hide what really suffers. It would not understand it is its own
enemy, that it attacks itself and wants to die. It is from this your
"laws" would save the body. It is for this you think you are a body.

^6^ There are no laws except the laws of God. This needs repeating over
and over until you realize that it applies to everything that you have
made in opposition to His Will. Your magic has no meaning. What it is
meant to save does not exist. Only what it is meant to hide will save
you.

^7^ The laws of God can never be replaced. We will devote today to
rejoicing that this is so. It is no longer a truth which we would hide.
We realize instead it is a truth which keeps us free forever. Magic
imprisons, but the laws of God set free. The light has come because
there are no laws but His.

^8^ We will begin the longer practice period today with a short review
of the different kinds of "laws" we have believed we must obey. These
would include, for example, the laws of nutrition, of immunization, of
medication, and of the body's protection in innumerable ways. Think
further-you believe in the laws of friendship, of "good" relationships,
and reciprocity.

^9^ Perhaps you even think that there are laws which set forth what is
God's and what is yours. Many "religions" have been based on this. They
would not save, but damn in Heaven's name. Yet they are no more strange
than other "laws" you hold must be obeyed to make you safe.

^10^ There are no laws but God's. Dismiss all foolish magical beliefs
today, and hold your mind in silent readiness to hear the Voice that
speaks the truth to you. You will be listening to One Who says there is
no loss under the laws of God. Payment is neither given nor received.
Exchange cannot be made, there are no substitutes, and nothing is
replaced by something else. God's laws forever give and never take.

^11^ Hear Him Who tells you this, and realize how foolish are the laws
you thought upheld the world you thought you saw. Then listen further.
He will tell you more. About the Love your Father has for you. About the
endless joy He offers you. About His yearning for His only Son, created
as His channel for creation; denied to Him by his belief in hell.

^12^ Let us today open God's channels to Him and let His Will extend
through us to Him. Thus is creation endlessly increased. His Voice will
speak of this to us, as well as of the joys of Heaven which His laws
keep limitless forever. We will repeat today's idea until we have
listened and understood there are no laws but God's. Then we will tell
ourselves, as a dedication with which the practice period concludes:

*^13^ I am under no laws but God's.*

^14^ We will repeat this dedication as often as possible today; at least
four or five times an hour, as well as in response to any temptation to
experience ourselves as subject to other laws throughout the day. It is
our statement of freedom from all danger and all tyranny. It is our
acknowledgment that God is our Father, and that His Son is saved.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 77 I am entitled to miracles**](#part0004.html#level-345) {#part0040_split_027.html#h1-345 .level1}

^1^ You are entitled to miracles because of what you are. You will
receive miracles because of what God is. And you will offer miracles
because you are one with God. Again, how simple is salvation! It is
merely a statement of your true identity. It is this that we will
celebrate today.

^2^ Your claim to miracles does not lie in your illusions about
yourself. It does not depend on any magical powers you have ascribed to
yourself nor on any of the rituals you have devised. It is inherent in
the truth of what you are. It is implicit in what God your Father is. It
was ensured in your creation and guaranteed by the laws of God.

^3^ Today we will claim the miracles which are your right since they
belong to you. You have been promised full release from the world you
made. You have been assured that the Kingdom of God is within you and
can never be lost. We ask no more than what belongs to us in truth.
Today, however, we will also make sure that we will not content
ourselves with less.

^4^ Begin the longer practice periods by telling yourself quite
confidently that you are entitled to miracles. Closing your eyes, remind
yourself that you are asking only for what is rightfully yours. Remind
yourself also that miracles are never taken from one and given to
another and that in asking for your rights you are upholding the rights
of everyone. Miracles do not obey the laws of this world. They merely
follow from the laws of God.

^5^ After this brief introductory phase, wait quietly for the assurance
that your request is granted. You have asked for the salvation of the
world and for your own. You have requested that you be given the means
by which this is accomplished. You cannot fail to be assured in this.
You are but asking that the Will of God be done. In doing this, you do
not really ask for anything. You state a fact that cannot be denied.

^6^ The Holy Spirit cannot but assure you that your request is granted.
The fact that you accepted must be so. There is no room for doubt and
uncertainty today. We are asking a real question at last. The answer is
a simple statement of a simple fact. You will receive the assurance that
you seek.

^7^ Our shorter practice periods will be frequent and will also be
devoted to a reminder of a simple fact. Tell yourself often today:

*^8^ I am entitled to miracles.*

^9^ Ask for them whenever a situation arises in which they are called
for. You will recognize these situations; you are not relying on
yourself to find them, you are therefore fully entitled to receive them
whenever you ask.

^10^ Remember, too, not to be satisfied with less than the perfect
answer. Be quick to tell yourself, should you be tempted:

*^11^ I will not trade miracles for grievances.\
I want only what belongs to me.\
God has established miracles as my right.*
:::

[]{#part0040_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 78 Let miracles replace all grievances**](#part0004.html#level-346) {#part0040_split_028.html#h1-346 .level1}

^1^ Perhaps it is not yet quite clear to you that each decision that you
make is one between a grievance and a miracle. Each grievance stands
like a dark shield of hate before the miracle it would conceal. And as
you raise it up before your eyes, you will not see the miracle beyond.
Yet all the while it waits for you in light, but you behold your
grievances instead.

^2^ Today we go beyond the grievances to look upon the miracle instead.
We will reverse the way you see by not allowing sight to stop before it
sees. We will not wait before the shield of hate, but lay it down and
gently lift our eyes in silence to behold the Son of God.

^3^ He waits for you behind your grievances, and as you lay them down he
will appear in shining light where each one stood before. For every
grievance is a block to sight, and as it lifts, you see the Son of God
where he has always been. He stands in light, but you were in the dark.
Each grievance made the darkness deeper, and you could not see.

^4^ Today we will attempt to see God's Son. We will not let ourselves be
blind to him; we will not look upon our grievances. So is the seeing of
the world reversed, as we look out toward truth, away from fear.

^5^ We will select one person you have used as target for your
grievances and lay the grievances aside and look at him. Someone perhaps
you fear and even hate; someone you think you love who angers you;
someone you call a friend, but whom you see as difficult at times or
hard to please-demanding, irritating, or untrue to the ideal he should
accept as his according to the role you set for him.

^6^ You know the one to choose; his name has crossed your mind already.
He will be the one of whom we ask God's Son be shown to us. Through
seeing him behind the grievances that we have held against him, you will
learn that what lay hidden while you saw him not is there in everyone
and can be seen. He who was enemy is more than friend when he is freed
to take the holy role the Holy Spirit has assigned to him. Let him be
savior unto you today. Such is his role in God your Father's plan.

^7^ Our longer practice periods today will see him in this role. We will
attempt to hold him in our mind, first as you now consider him. We will
review his faults, the difficulties you have had with him, the pain he
caused you, his neglect, and all the little and the larger hurts he
gave. We will regard his body with its flaws and better points as well,
and we will think of his mistakes and even of his "sins."

^8^ Then let us ask of Him Who knows this Son of God in his reality and
truth that we may look on him a different way and see our savior shining
in the light of true forgiveness given unto us. We ask Him in the Holy
Name of God and of His Son, as holy as Himself:

*^9^ Let me behold my savior in this one\
You have appointed as the one for me\
To ask to lead me to the holy light\
In which he stands, that I may join with him.*

^10^ The body's eyes are closed, and as you think of him who grieved
you, let your mind be shown the light in him beyond your grievances.
What you have asked for cannot be denied. Your savior has been waiting
long for this. He would be free and make his freedom yours. The Holy
Spirit leans from him to you, seeing no separation in God's Son. And
what you see through Him will free you both.

^11^ Be very quiet now and look upon your shining savior. No dark
grievances obscure the sight of him. You have allowed the Holy Spirit to
express through him the role God gave Him that you might be saved. God
thanks you for these quiet times today in which you laid your images
aside and looked upon the miracle of love the Holy Spirit showed you in
their place. The world and Heaven join in thanking you, for not one
Thought of God but must rejoice as you are saved and all the world with
you.

^12^ We will remember this throughout the day and take the role assigned
to us as part of God's salvation plan, and not our own. Temptation falls
away when we allow each one we meet to save us and refuse to hide his
light behind our grievances. To everyone you meet and to the ones you
think of or remember from the past, allow the role of savior to be given
that you may share it with them. For you both, and all the sightless
ones as well, we pray:

*^13^ Let miracles replace all grievances.*
:::

[]{#part0040_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 79 Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved**](#part0004.html#level-347) {#part0040_split_029.html#h1-347 .level1}

^1^ A problem cannot be solved if you do not know what it is. Even if it
is really solved already, you will still have the problem because you
cannot recognize that it has been solved. This is the situation of the
world. The problem of separation, which is really the only problem, has
already been solved. But the solution is not recognized because the
problem is not recognized.

^2^ Everyone in this world seems to have his own special problems. Yet
they are all the same and must be recognized as one if the one solution
which solves them all is to be accepted. Who can see that a problem has
been solved if he thinks the problem is something else? Even if he is
given the answer, he cannot see its relevance.

^3^ That is the position in which you find yourself now. You have the
answer, but you are still uncertain about what the problem is. A long
series of different problems seems to confront you, and as one is
settled the next one and the next arise. There seems to be no end to
them. There is no time in which you feel completely free of problems and
at peace.

^4^ The temptation to regard problems as many is the temptation to keep
the problem of separation unsolved. The world seems to present you with
a vast number of problems, each requiring a different answer. This
perception places you in a position in which your problem solving must
be inadequate and failure must be inevitable.

^5^ No one could solve all the problems the world appears to hold. They
seem to be on so many levels, in such varying forms, and with such
varied content that they confront you with an impossible situation.
Dismay and depression are inevitable as you regard them. Some spring up
unexpectedly, just as you think you have resolved the previous ones.
Others remain unsolved under a cloud of denial and rise to haunt you
from time to time, only to be hidden again but still unsolved.

^6^ All this complexity is but a desperate attempt not to recognize the
problem and therefore not to let it be resolved. If you could recognize
that your only problem is separation, no matter what form it takes, you
could accept the answer because you would see its relevance. Perceiving
the underlying constancy in all the problems which confront you, you
would understand that you have the means to solve them all. And you
would use the means because you recognize the problem.

^7^ In our longer practice periods today, we will ask what the problem
is and what is the answer to it. We will not assume that we already
know. We will try to free our minds of all the many different kinds of
problems that we think we have. We will try to realize that we have only
one problem, which we have failed to recognize. We will ask what it is
and wait for the answer. We will be told. Then we will ask for the
solution to it. And we will be told.

^8^ Our exercises for today will be successful to the extent to which we
do not insist on defining the problem. Perhaps we will not succeed in
letting all our preconceived notions go, but that is not necessary. All
that is necessary is to entertain some doubt about the reality of our
version of what our problems are. We are trying to recognize that we
have been given the answer by recognizing the problem, so that the
problem and the answer can be brought together, and we can be at peace.

^9^ The shorter practice periods for today will not be set by time but
by need. You will see many problems today, each one calling for an
answer. Our efforts will be directed toward recognizing that there is
only one problem and one answer. In this recognition are all problems
resolved. In this recognition there is peace.

^10^ Be not deceived by the form of problems today. Whenever any
difficulty seems to rise, tell yourself quickly:

*^11^ Let me recognize this problem so it can be solved.*

^12^ Then try to suspend all judgment about what the problem is. If
possible, close your eyes for a moment and ask what it is. You will be
heard and you will be answered.
:::

[]{#part0040_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 80 Let me recognize my problems have been solved**](#part0004.html#level-348) {#part0040_split_030.html#h1-348 .level1}

^1^ If you are willing to recognize your problems, you will recognize
that you have no problems. Your one central problem has been answered,
and you have no other. Therefore you must be at peace. Salvation does
depend on recognizing this one problem and understanding that it has
been solved. One problem-one solution. Salvation is accomplished.
Freedom from conflict has been given you. Accept that fact, and you are
ready to take your rightful place in God's plan for salvation.

^2^ Your only problem has been solved! Repeat this over and over to
yourself today with gratitude and conviction. You have recognized your
only problem, opening the way for the Holy Spirit to give you God's
answer. You have laid deception aside and seen the light of truth. You
have accepted salvation for yourself by bringing the problem to the
answer. And you can recognize the answer because the problem has been
identified.

^3^ You are entitled to peace today. A problem that has been resolved
cannot trouble you. Only be certain you do not forget that all problems
are the same. Their many forms will not deceive you while you remember
this. One problem-one solution. Accept the peace this simple statement
brings.

^4^ In our longer practice periods today, we will claim the peace that
must be ours when the problem and the answer have been brought together.
The problem must be gone because God's answer cannot fail. Having
recognized one, you have recognized the other. The solution is inherent
in the problem. You are answered and have accepted the answer. You are
saved.

^5^ Now let the peace that your acceptance brings be given you. Close
your eyes and receive your reward. Recognize that your problems have
been solved. Recognize that you are out of conflict, free, and at peace.
Above all, remember that you have one problem and that the problem has
one solution. It is in this that the simplicity of salvation lies. It is
because of this that it is guaranteed to work.

^6^ Assure yourself often today that your problems have been solved.
Repeat the idea with deep conviction as frequently as possible. And be
particularly sure to remember to apply the idea for today to any
specific problem that may arise. Say quickly:

*^7^ Let me recognize this problem has been solved.*

^8^ Let us be determined not to collect grievances today. Let us be
determined to be free of problems that do not exist. The means is simple
honesty. Do not deceive yourself about what the problem is, and you must
recognize it has been solved.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review II**](#part0004.html#parta-2) {#part0041_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R2:1^ We are now ready for another review. We will begin where our last
review left off and cover two ideas each day. The earlier part of each
day will be devoted to one of these ideas, and the latter part of the
day to the other. We will have one longer exercise period and frequent
shorter ones in which we practice each of them.

^2^ The longer practice periods will follow this general form: take
about 15 minutes for each of them, and begin by thinking about the idea
and the comments which are included in the assignments. Devote about
three or four minutes to reading them over slowly, several times if you
wish, and then close your eyes and listen. Repeat the first phase if you
find your mind wandering, but try to spend the major part of the
practice period listening quietly but attentively.

^3^ There is a message waiting for you. Be confident that you will
receive it. Remember that it belongs to you and that you want it. Do not
allow your intent to waver in the face of distracting thoughts. Realize
that, whatever form they take, they have no meaning and no power.
Replace them with your determination to succeed. Do not forget that your
will has power over all fantasies and dreams. Trust it to see you
through and carry you beyond them all.

^4^ Regard these practice periods as dedications to the way, the truth,
and the life. Refuse to be side-tracked into detours, illusions, and
thoughts of death. You are dedicated to salvation. Be determined each
day not to leave your function unfulfilled.

^5^ Reaffirm your determination in the shorter practice periods as well,
using the original form of the idea for general application and a more
specific form when needed. Some specific forms will be included in the
comments. These, however, are merely suggestions. It is not the
particular words you use that matter.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 81**](#part0004.html#level-349) {#part0041_split_001.html#h1-349 .level1}

^1^ Our ideas for review today are:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[61\] I am the light of the world.

^2^ How holy am I, who have been given the function of lighting up the
world! Let me be still before my holiness. In its calm light, let all my
conflicts disappear. In its peace, let me remember who I am.

^3^ Some specific forms for applying the idea when specific difficulties
seem to arise might be:

*^4^ Let me not obscure the light of the world in me.\
Let the light of the world shine through this appearance.\
This shadow will vanish before the light.*

\[62\] Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world.

^5^ It is through accepting my function that I will see the light in me.
And in this light will my function stand clear and perfectly unambiguous
before my sight. My acceptance does not depend on my recognizing what my
function is, for I do not yet understand forgiveness. Yet I will trust
that in the light I will see it as it is.

^6^ Specific forms for using the idea might include:
:::

*^7^ Let this help me learn what forgiveness means.\
Let me not separate my function from my will.\
I would not use this for an alien purpose.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 82**](#part0004.html#level-350) {#part0041_split_002.html#h1-350 .level1}

^1^ We will review these ideas today:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[63\] The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my
forgiveness.

^2^ My forgiveness is the means by which the light of the world finds
expression through me. My forgiveness is the means by which I become
aware of the light of the world in me. My forgiveness is the means by
which the world is healed, together with myself. Let me, then, forgive
the world that it may be healed along with me.
:::

^3^ Suggestions for specific forms for applying this idea are:

*^4^ Let peace extend from my mind to yours, \[name\].\
I share the light of the world with you, \[name\].\
Through my forgiveness I can see this as it is.*

::: {.pull-quote}
\[64\] Let me not forget my function.

^5^ I would not forget my function because I would remember my Self. I
cannot fulfil my function by forgetting. And unless I fulfil my
function, I will not experience the joy that God intends for me.

^6^ Suitable specific forms of this idea include:
:::

*^7^ Let me not use this to hide my function from me.\
I would use this as an opportunity to fulfill my function.\
This may threaten my ego but cannot change my function in any way**.***
:::

[]{#part0041_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 83**](#part0004.html#level-351) {#part0041_split_003.html#h1-351 .level1}

^1^ Today let us review these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[65\] My only function is the one God gave me.

^2^ I have no function but the one God gave me. This recognition
releases me from all conflict because it means I cannot have conflicting
goals. With one purpose only, I am always certain what to do, what to
say, and what to think. All doubt must disappear as I acknowledge that
my only function is the one God gave me.

^3^ More specific applications of this idea might take these forms:

*^4^ My perception of this does not change my function.\
This does not give me a function other than the one God gave me.\
Let me not use this to justify a function God did not give to me.*

\[66\] My happiness and my function are one.

^5^ All things that come from God are one. They come from Oneness and
must be received as one. Fulfilling my function is my happiness because
both come from the same Source. And I must learn to recognize what makes
me happy if I would find happiness.

^6^ Some useful forms for specific applications of this idea are:
:::

*^7^ This cannot separate my happiness from my function.\
The oneness of my happiness and my function\
remains wholly unaffected by this.\
Nothing, including this, can justify the illusion of happiness\
apart from my function.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 84**](#part0004.html#level-352) {#part0041_split_004.html#h1-352 .level1}

^1^ These are the ideas for today's review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[67\] Love created me like Itself.

^2^ I am in the likeness of my Creator. I cannot suffer, I cannot
experience loss, and I cannot die. I am not a body. I would recognize my
reality today. I will worship no idols nor raise my own self-concepts to
replace my Self. I am in the likeness of my Creator. Love created me
like Itself.

^3^ You might find these specific forms helpful in applying the idea:

*^4^ Let me not see an illusion of myself in this.\
As I look on this, let me remember my Creator.\
My Creator did not create this as I see it.*

\[68\] Love holds no grievances.

^5^ Grievances are completely alien to love. Grievances attack love and
keep its light obscure. If I hold grievances I am attacking love and
therefore attacking my Self. My Self thus becomes alien to me. I am
determined not to attack my Self today, so that I can remember who I am.

^6^ These specific forms for applying this idea would be helpful:
:::

*^7^ This is no justification for denying my Self.\
I will not use this to attack love.\
Let this not tempt me to attack myself.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 85**](#part0004.html#level-353) {#part0041_split_005.html#h1-353 .level1}

^1^ Today's review will cover these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[69\] My grievances hide the light of the world in me.

^2^ My grievances show me what is not there and hide from me what I
would see. Recognizing this, what do I want my grievances for? They keep
me in darkness and hide the light. Grievances and light cannot go
together, but light and vision must be joined for me to see. To see, I
must lay grievances aside. I want to see, and this will be the means by
which I will succeed.

^3^ Specific applications of this idea might be made in these forms:

*^4^ Let me not use this as a block to sight.\
The light of the world will shine all this away.\
I have no need for this. I want to see.*

\[70\] My salvation comes from me.

^5^ Today I will recognize where my salvation is. It is in me because
its Source is there. It has not left its Source, and so it cannot have
left my mind. I will not look for it outside myself. It is not found
outside and then brought in. But from within me it will reach beyond,
and everything I see will but reflect the light that shines in me and in
itself.

^6^ These forms of the idea are suitable for more specific application:
:::

*^7^ Let this not tempt me to look away from me for my salvation.\
I will not let this interfere with my awareness of the Source of my
salvation.\
This has no power to remove salvation from me.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 86**](#part0004.html#level-354) {#part0041_split_006.html#h1-354 .level1}

^1^ These ideas are for review today:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[71\] Only God's plan for salvation will work.

^2^ It is senseless for me to search wildly about for salvation. I have
seen it in many people and in many things, but when I reached for it, it
was not there. I was mistaken about where it is. I was mistaken about
what it is. I will undertake no more idle seeking. Only God's plan for
salvation will work. And I will rejoice because His plan can never fail.

^3^ These are some suggested forms for applying this idea specifically:

*^4^ God's plan for salvation will save me from my perception of this.\
This is no exception in God's plan for my salvation.\
Let me perceive this only in the light of God's plan for salvation.*

\[72\] Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.

^5^ Holding grievances is an attempt to prove that God's plan for
salvation will not work. Yet only His plan will work. By holding
grievances, I am therefore excluding my only hope of salvation from my
awareness. I would no longer defeat my own best interests in this insane
way. I would accept God's plan for salvation and be happy.

^6^ Specific applications of this idea might be in these forms:
:::

*^7^ I am choosing between \>misperception and salvation as I look on
this.\
If I see grounds for grievances in this\
I will not see the grounds for my salvation. This calls for salvation,
not attack.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 87**](#part0004.html#level-355) {#part0041_split_007.html#h1-355 .level1}

^1^ Our review today will cover these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[73\] I will there be light.

^2^ I will use the power of my will today. It is not my will to grope
about in darkness, fearful of shadows and afraid of things unseen and
unreal. Light shall be my guide today. I will follow it where it leads
me, and I will look only on what it shows me. This day I will experience
the peace of true perception.

^3^ These forms of this idea would be helpful for specific application:

*^4^ This cannot hide the light I will to see.\
You stand with me in light, \[name\].\
In the light this will look different.*

\[74\] There is no will but God's.

^5^ I am safe today because there is no will but God's. I can become
afraid only when I believe that there is another will. I try to attack
only when I am afraid, and only when I try to attack can I believe that
my eternal safety is threatened. Today I will recognize that all this
has not occurred. I am safe because there is no will but God's.

^6^ These are some useful forms of this idea for specific applications:
:::

*^7^ Let me perceive this in accordance with the Will of God.\
It is God's Will you are His Son, \[name\], and mine as well.\
This is part of God's Will for me, however I may see it.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 88**](#part0004.html#level-356) {#part0041_split_008.html#h1-356 .level1}

^1^ Today we will review these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[75\] The light has come.

^2^ In choosing salvation rather than attack, I merely choose to
recognize what is already here. Salvation is a decision made already.
Attack and grievances are not there to choose. That is why I always
choose between truth and illusion, between what is there and what is
not. The light has come. I can but choose the light, for it has no
alternative. It has replaced the darkness, and the dark is gone.

^3^ These would prove useful forms for specific applications of this
idea:

*^4^ This cannot show me darkness, for the light has come.\
The light in you is all that I would see, \[name\].\
I would see in this only what is there.*

\[76\] I am under no laws but God's.

^5^ Here is the perfect statement of my freedom. I am under no laws but
God's. I am constantly tempted to make up other laws and give them power
over me. I suffer only because of my belief in them. They have no real
effect on me at all. I am perfectly free of the effects of all laws save
God's. And His are the laws of freedom.

^6^ For specific forms in applying this idea, these would be useful:
:::

*^7^ My perception of this shows me I believe in laws which do not
exist.\
I see only the laws of God at work in this.\
Let me allow God's laws to work in this and not my own.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 89**](#part0004.html#level-357) {#part0041_split_009.html#h1-357 .level1}

^1^ These are our review ideas for today:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[77\] I am entitled to miracles.

^2^ I am entitled to miracles because I am under no laws but God's. His
laws release me from all grievances and replace them with miracles. And
I would accept the miracles in place of the grievances, which are but
illusions that hide the miracles beyond. Now I would accept only what
the laws of God entitle me to have that I may use it on behalf of the
function He has given me.

^3^ You might use these suggestions for specific applications of this
idea:

*^4^ Behind this is a miracle to which I am entitled.\
Let me not hold a grievance against you \[name\],\
but offer you the miracle that belongs to you instead.\
Seen truly, this offers me a miracle.*

\[78\] Let miracles replace all grievances.

^5^ By this idea do I unite my will with the Holy Spirit's and perceive
them as one. By this idea do I accept my release from hell. By this idea
do I express my willingness to have all my illusions be replaced with
truth according to God's plan for my salvation. I would make no
exceptions and no substitutes. I want all of Heaven and only Heaven, as
God wills me to have.

^6^ Useful specific forms for applying this idea would be:
:::

*^7^ I would not hold this grievance apart from my salvation.\
Let our grievances be replaced by miracles, \[name\].\
Beyond this is the miracle by which all my grievances are replaced.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 90**](#part0004.html#level-358) {#part0041_split_010.html#h1-358 .level1}

^1^ For this review we will use these ideas:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[79\] Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved.

^2^ Let me realize today that the problem is always some form of
grievance which I would cherish. Let me also understand that the
solution is always a miracle with which I let the grievance be replaced.
Today I would remember the simplicity of salvation by reinforcing the
lesson that there is one problem and one solution. The problem is a
grievance; the solution is a miracle. And I invite the solution to come
to me through my forgiveness of the grievance and my welcome of the
miracle which takes its place.

^3^ Specific applications of this idea might be in these forms:

*^4^ This presents a problem to me which I would have resolved.\
The miracle behind this grievance will resolve it for me.\
The answer to this problem is the miracle which it conceals.*

\[80\] Let me recognize my problems have been solved.

^5^ I seem to have problems only because I am misusing time. I believe
that the problem comes first, and time must elapse before it can be
worked out. I do not see the problem and the answer as simultaneous in
their occurrence. That is because I do not yet realize that God has
placed the answer together with the problem, so that they cannot be
separated by time. The Holy Spirit will teach me this if I will let Him.
And I will understand it is impossible that I could have a problem which
has not been solved already.

^6^ These forms of the idea will be useful for specific applications:
:::

*^7^ I need not wait for this to be resolved.\
The answer to this problem is already given me if I will accept it.\
Time cannot separate this problem from its solution.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 91 Miracles are seen in light**](#part0004.html#level-359) {#part0041_split_011.html#h1-359 .level1}

^1^ It is important to remember that miracles and vision necessarily go
together. This needs repeating and frequent repeating. It is a central
idea in your new thought system and the perception which it produces.
The miracle is always there. Its presence is not caused by your vision;
its absence is not the result of your failure to see. It is only your
awareness of miracles that is affected. You will see it in the light;
you will not see it in the dark.

^2^ To you, then, light is crucial. While you remain in darkness, the
miracle remains unseen. Thus you are convinced it is not there. This
follows from the premises from which the darkness comes. Denial of light
leads to failure to perceive it. Failure to perceive light is to
perceive darkness. The light is useless to you then, even though it is
there. You cannot use it because its presence is unknown to you. And the
seeming reality of the darkness makes the idea of light meaningless.

^3^ To be told that what you do not see is there sounds like insanity.
It is very difficult to become convinced that it is insanity not to see
what is there and to see what is not there instead. You do not doubt
that the body's eyes can see. You do not doubt the images they show you
are reality. Your faith lies in the darkness, not the light.

^4^ How can this be reversed? For you it is impossible, but you are not
alone in this. Your efforts, however little they may be, have strong
support. Did you but realize how great this strength, your doubts would
vanish. Today we will devote ourselves to the attempt to let you feel
this strength. When you have felt the strength in you which makes all
miracles within your easy reach, you will not doubt. The miracles your
sense of weakness hides will leap into awareness as you feel the
strength in you.

^5^ Three times today, set aside about ten minutes for a quiet time in
which you try to leave your weakness behind. This is accomplished very
simply, as you instruct yourself that you are not a body. Faith goes to
what you want, and you instruct your mind accordingly. Your will remains
your teacher, and your will has all the strength to do what it desires.
You can escape the body if you choose. You can experience the strength
in you.

^6^ Begin the longer practice periods with this statement of true cause
and effect relationships:

*^7^ Miracles are seen in light.\
The body's eyes do not perceive the light.\
But I am not a body. What am I?*

^8^ The question with which this statement ends is needed for our
exercises today. What you think you are is a belief to be undone. But
what you really are must be revealed to you. The belief you are a body
calls for correction, being a mistake. The truth of what you are calls
on the strength in you to bring to your awareness what the mistake
concealed.

^9^ If you are not a body, what are you? You need to be aware of what
the Holy Spirit uses to replace the image of a body in your mind. You
need to feel something to put your faith in, as you lift it from the
body. You need a real experience of something else, something more solid
and more sure, more worthy of your faith, and really there.

^10^ If you are not a body, what are you? Ask this in honesty, and then
devote several minutes to allowing your mistaken thoughts about your
attributes to be corrected, and their opposites to take their place.
Say, for example:

*^11^ I am not weak, but strong.\
I am not helpless, but all powerful.\
I am not limited, but unlimited.\
I am not doubtful, but certain.\
I am not an illusion, but a reality.\
I cannot see in darkness, but in light.*

^12^ In the second phase of the exercise period, try to experience these
truths about yourself. Concentrate particularly on the experience of
strength. Remember that all sense of weakness is associated with the
belief you are a body, a belief that is mistaken and deserves no faith.
Try to remove your faith from it, if only for a moment. You will become
accustomed to keeping faith with the more worthy in you as we go along.

^13^ Relax for the rest of the practice period, confident that your
efforts, however meager, are fully supported by the strength of God and
all His Thoughts. It is from Them your strength will come. It is through
Their strong support that you will feel the strength in you. They are
united with you in this practice period in which you share a purpose
like Their own. Theirs is the light in which you will see miracles
because Their strength is yours. Their strength becomes your eyes that
you may see.

^14^ Five or six times an hour at reasonably regular intervals remind
yourself that miracles are seen in light. Also, be sure to meet
temptation with today's idea. This form would be helpful for this
special purpose:

*^15^ Miracles are seen in light. Let me not close my eyes because of
this.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 92 Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one**](#part0004.html#level-360) {#part0041_split_012.html#h1-360 .level1}

^1^ The idea for today is an extension of the previous one. You do not
think of light in terms of strength and darkness in terms of weakness.
That is because your idea of what seeing means is tied up with the body
and its eyes and brain. This is why you believe that you can change what
you see by keeping little bits of glass or other clear material before
your eyes held in a frame or placed against the eye.

^2^ These are among the many magical beliefs that come from the
conviction you are a body and the body's eyes can see. You also believe
the body's brain can think. If you but understood the nature of thought,
you could but laugh at this insane idea. It is as if you thought you
held the match that lights the sun and gives it all its warmth or that
you had the universe imprisoned in your hand, securely bound until you
let it go. Yet this is no more foolish than to believe the body's eyes
can see, the brain can think.

^3^ It is God's strength in you that is the light in which you see, as
it is His Mind with which you think. His strength denies your weakness.
It is your weakness that sees through the body's eyes, peering about in
darkness to behold the likeness of itself-the small, the weak, the
sickly and the dying, those in need, the helpless and afraid, the sad,
the poor, the starving, and the joyless. These are seen through eyes
which cannot see and cannot bless.

^4^ Strength overlooks these things by seeing past appearances. It keeps
its steady gaze upon the light that lies beyond them. It unites with
light, of which it is a part. It sees itself. It brings the light in
which your Self appears. In darkness you perceive a self that is not
there.

^5^ Strength is the truth about you; weakness is an idol falsely
worshipped, and adored that strength may be dispelled and darkness rule
where God appointed that there should be light. Strength comes from
truth and shines with light its Source has given it; weakness reflects
the darkness of its maker. It is sick and looks on sickness, which is
like itself.

^6^ Truth is a savior and can only will for happiness and peace for
everyone. It gives its strength to everyone who asks, in limitless
supply. It sees that lack in anyone would be a lack in all, and so it
gives its light that all may see and benefit as one. Its strength is
shared that it may bring to all the miracle in which they will unite in
purpose and forgiveness and in love.

^7^ Weakness, which looks in darkness, cannot see a purpose in
forgiveness and in love. It sees all others different from itself and
nothing in the world that it would share. It judges and condemns but
does not love. In darkness it remains to hide itself and dreams that it
is strong and conquering, a victor over limitations that but grow in
darkness to enormous size. It fears and it attacks and hates itself, and
darkness covers everything it sees, leaving its dreams as fearful as
itself. No miracles are here, but only hate. It separates itself from
what it sees, while light and strength perceive themselves as one.

^8^ The light of strength is not the light you see. It does not change
and flicker and go out. It does not shift from night to day and back to
darkness till the morning comes again. The light of strength is
constant, sure as love, forever glad to give itself away because it
cannot give but to itself. No one can ask in vain to share its sight,
and none who enters its abode can leave without a miracle before his
eyes and strength and light abiding in his heart.

^9^ The strength in you will offer you the light and guide your seeing,
so you do not dwell on idle shadows that the body's eyes provide for
self-deception. Strength and light unite in you, and where they meet,
your Self stands ready to embrace you as Its own. Such is the meeting
place we try today to find and rest in, for the peace of God is where
your Self, His Son, is waiting now to meet itself again and be as one.

^10^ Let us give 20 minutes twice today to join this meeting. Let
yourself be brought unto your Self. Its strength will be the light in
which the gift of sight is given you. Leave, then, the dark a little
while today, and we will practice seeing in the light, closing the
body's eyes and asking truth to show us how to find the meeting place of
self and Self, where light and strength are one.

^11^ After the morning meeting, we will use the day in preparation for
the time at night when we will meet again in hope and trust. Let us
repeat as often as we can the idea for today and recognize that we are
being introduced to sight and led away from darkness to the light, where
only miracles can be perceived.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 93 Light and joy and peace abide in me**](#part0004.html#level-361) {#part0041_split_013.html#h1-361 .level1}

^1^ You think you are the home of evil, darkness, and sin. You think if
anyone could see the truth about you he would be repelled, recoiling
from you as if from a poisonous snake. You think if what is true about
you were revealed to you, you would be struck with horror so intense
that you would rush to death by your own hand, living on after seeing
this being impossible.

^2^ These are beliefs so firmly fixed that it is difficult to help you
see that they are based on nothing. That you have made mistakes is
obvious. That you have sought salvation in strange ways-have been
deceived, deceiving, and afraid of foolish fantasies and savage dreams
and have bowed down to idols made of dust-all this is true by what you
now believe.

^3^ Today we question this, not from the point of view of what you
think, but from a very different reference point from which such idle
thoughts are meaningless. These thoughts are not according to God's
Will. These weird beliefs He does not share with you. This is enough to
prove that they are wrong, but you do not perceive that this is so.

^4^ Why would you not be overjoyed to be assured that all the evil that
you think you did was never done, that all your "sins" are nothing, that
you are as pure and holy as you were created, and that light and joy and
peace abide in you? Your image of yourself cannot withstand the Will of
God. You think that this is death, but it is life. You think you are
destroyed, but you are saved.

^5^ The self you made is not the Son of God. Therefore, this self does
not exist at all. And anything it seems to do and think means nothing.
It is neither bad nor good. It is unreal and nothing more than that. It
does not battle with the Son of God. It does not hurt him nor attack his
peace. It has not changed creation nor reduced eternal sinlessness to
sin and love to hate. What power can this self you made possess when it
would contradict the Will of God?

^6^ Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God. Over and over this must be
repeated until it is accepted. It is true. Your sinlessness is
guaranteed by God. Nothing can touch it nor can change what God created
as eternal. The self you made, evil and full of sin, is meaningless.
Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God, and light and joy and peace abide
in you.

^7^ Salvation requires the acceptance of but one thought-you are as God
created you, not what you made of yourself. Whatever evil you may think
you did, you are as God created you. Whatever mistakes you made, the
truth about you is unchanged. Creation is eternal and unalterable. Your
sinlessness is guaranteed by God. You are and will forever be exactly as
you were created. Light and joy and peace abide in you because God put
them there.

^8^ In our longer exercise periods today, which would be most profitable
if done for the first five minutes of every waking hour, we will begin
by stating the truth about our creation:

*^9^ Light and joy and peace abide in me.\
My sinlessness is guaranteed by God.*

^10^ Then put away your foolish self-images and spend the rest of the
practice period in trying to experience what God has given you in place
of what you have decreed for yourself.

^11^ You are what God created or what you made. One Self is true; the
other is not there. Try to experience the unity of your One Self. Try to
appreciate its holiness and the love from which it was created. Try not
to interfere with the Self which God created as you by hiding its
majesty behind the tiny idols of evil and sinfulness you have made to
replace it. Let it come into its own. Here you are. This is you. And
light and joy and peace abide in you because this is so.

^12^ You may not be willing or even able to use the first five minutes
of each hour for these exercises. Try, however, to do so when you can.
At least remember to repeat these thoughts each hour:

*^13^ Light and joy and peace abide in me.\
My sinlessness is guaranteed by God.*

^14^ Then try to devote at least a minute or so to closing your eyes and
realizing that this is a statement of the truth about you.

^15^ If a situation arises that seems to be disturbing, quickly dispel
the illusion of fear by repeating these thoughts again. Should you be
tempted to become angry with someone, tell him silently:

*^16^ Light and joy and peace abide in you.\
Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God.*

^17^ You can do much for the world's salvation today. You can do much
today to bring you closer to the part in salvation which God has
assigned to you. And you can do much today to bring the conviction to
your mind that the idea for the day is true indeed.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 94 I am as God created me**](#part0004.html#level-362) {#part0041_split_014.html#h1-362 .level1}

^1^ Today we continue with the one idea which brings complete salvation;
the one statement which makes all forms of temptation powerless; the one
thought which renders the ego silent and entirely undone. You are as God
created you. The sounds of this world are still, the sights of this
world disappear, and all the thoughts that this world ever held are
wiped away forever by this one idea. Here is salvation accomplished.
Here is sanity restored.

^2^ True light is strength, and strength is sinlessness. If you remain
as God created you, you must be strong and light must be in you. He Who
ensured your sinlessness must be the guarantee of strength and light as
well. You are as God created you. Darkness cannot obscure the glory of
the Son of God. You stand in light, strong in the sinlessness in which
you were created and in which you will remain throughout eternity.

^3^ Today we will again devote the first five minutes of each waking
hour to the attempt to feel the truth in you. Begin these times of
searching with these words:

*^4^ I am as God created me.\
I am His Son eternally**.***

^5^ Now try to reach the Son of God in you. This is the Self that never
sinned nor made an image to replace reality. This is the Self which
never left its home in God to walk the world uncertainly. This is the
Self which knows no fear nor could conceive of loss or suffering or
death.

^6^ Nothing is required of you to reach this goal except to lay all
idols and self-images aside, go past the long list of attributes, both
"good" and "bad," you have ascribed to yourself and wait in silent
expectancy for the truth. God has Himself promised that it will be
revealed to all who ask for it. You are asking now. You cannot fail
because He cannot fail.

^7^ If you do not meet the requirement of practicing for the first five
minutes of every hour, at least remind yourself hourly:

*^8^ I am as God created me.\
I am His Son eternally.*

^9^ Tell yourself frequently today that you are as God created you. And
be sure to respond to anyone who seems to irritate you with these words:

*^10^ You are as God created you.\
You are His Son eternally.*

^11^ Make every effort to do the hourly exercises today. Each one you do
will be a giant stride toward your release and a milestone in learning
the thought system which this course sets forth.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 95 I am One Self, united with my Creator**](#part0004.html#level-363) {#part0041_split_015.html#h1-363 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea accurately describes you as God created you. You are
one within yourself and one with Him. Yours is the unity of all
creation. Your perfect unity makes change in you impossible. You do not
accept this and you fail to realize it must be so, only because you
believe that you have changed yourself already. You see yourself as a
ridiculous parody on God's creation-weak, vicious, ugly and sinful,
miserable and beset with pain.

^2^ Such is your version of yourself-a self divided into many warring
parts, separate from God, and tenuously held together by its erratic and
capricious maker, to which you pray. It does not hear your prayers, for
it is deaf. It does not see the oneness in you, for it is blind. It does
not understand you are the Son of God, for it is senseless and
understands nothing.

^3^ We will attempt today to be aware of only what can hear and see and
what makes perfect sense. We will again direct our exercises towards
reaching your One Self, which is united with its Creator. In patience
and in hope we try again today.

^4^ The use of the first five minutes of every waking hour for
practicing the idea for the day has special advantages at the stage of
learning in which you are at present. It is difficult at this point not
to allow your mind to wander if it undertakes extended attempts. You
have surely realized this by now. You have seen the extent of your lack
of mental discipline and of your need for mind training. It is necessary
that you be aware of this, for it is indeed a hindrance to your advance.

^5^ Frequent but shorter practice periods have other advantages for you
at this time. In addition to recognizing your difficulties with
sustained attention, you must also have noticed that, unless you are
reminded of your purpose frequently, you tend to forget about it for
long periods of time. You often fail to remember the short applications
of the idea for the day, and you have not yet formed the habit of using
it as an automatic response to temptation.

^6^ Structure, then, is necessary for you at this time, planned to
include frequent reminders of your goal and regular attempts to reach
it. Regularity in terms of time is not the ideal requirement for the
most beneficial form of practice in salvation. It is advantageous,
however, for those whose motivation is inconsistent and who remain
heavily defended against learning.

^7^ We will therefore keep to the five minutes an hour practice periods
for a while and urge you to omit as few as possible. Using the first
five minutes of the hour will be particularly helpful since it imposes
firmer structure. Do not, however, use your lapses from this schedule as
an excuse not to return to it again as soon as you can.

^8^ There may well be a temptation to regard the day as lost because you
have already failed to do what is required. This should, however, merely
be recognized as what it is-a refusal to let your mistakes be corrected
and an unwillingness to try again.

^9^ The Holy Spirit is not delayed in His teaching by your mistakes. He
can be held back only by your unwillingness to let them go. Let us
therefore be determined, particularly for the next week or so, to be
willing to forgive ourselves for our lapses in diligence and our
failures to follow the instructions for practicing the day's idea.

^10^ This tolerance for weakness will enable us to overlook it, rather
than give it power to delay our learning. If we give it power to do
this, we are regarding it as strength and are confusing strength with
weakness. When you fail to comply with the requirements of this course,
you have merely made a mistake. This calls for correction and for
nothing else.

^11^ To allow a mistake to continue is to make additional mistakes based
on the first and reinforcing it. It is this process that must be laid
aside, for it is but another way in which you would defend illusions
against the truth. Let all these errors go by recognizing them for what
they are. They are attempts to keep you unaware you are One Self, united
with your Creator, at one with every aspect of creation, and limitless
in power and in peace.

^12^ This is the truth, and nothing else is true. Today we will affirm
this truth again and try to reach the place in you in which there is no
doubt that only this is true. Begin the practice periods today with this
assurance, given to your mind with all the certainty that you can give:

*^13^ I am One Self, united with my Creator,\
At one with every aspect of creation,\
And limitless in power and in peace.*

^14^ Then close your eyes and tell yourself again, slowly and
thoughtfully, attempting to allow the meaning of the words to sink into
your mind, replacing false ideas:

*^15^ I am One Self.*

^16^ Repeat this several times, and then attempt to feel the meaning
which the words convey. You are One Self, united and secure in light and
joy and peace. You are God's Son, One Self with one Creator and one
goal-to bring awareness of this oneness to all minds, that true creation
may extend the Allness and the Unity of God.

^17^ You are One Self, complete and healed and whole, with power to lift
the veil of darkness from the world and let the light in you come
through to teach the world the truth about itself. You are One Self, in
perfect harmony with all there is and all that there will be. You are
One Self, the holy Son of God, united with your brothers in this Self,
united with your Father in His Will.

^18^ Feel this One Self in you, and let it shine away all your illusions
and your doubts. This is your Self, the Son of God Himself, sinless as
its Creator, with His strength within you and His Love forever yours.
You are One Self, and it is given you to feel this Self within you and
to cast all your illusions out of the one Mind which is this Self, the
holy truth in you.

^19^ Do not forget today. We need your help, your little part in
bringing happiness to all the world. And Heaven looks to you in
confidence that you will try today. Share, then, its surety, for it is
yours. Be vigilant. Do not forget today.

^20^ Throughout the day do not forget your goal. Repeat today's idea as
frequently as possible and understand each time you do so, someone hears
the voice of hope, the stirring of the truth within his mind, the gentle
rustling of the wings of peace. Your own acknowledgment you are One
Self, united with your Father, is a call to all the world to be at one
with you. To everyone you meet today be sure to give the promise of
today's idea and tell him this:

*^21^ You are One Self with me,\
United with our Creator in this Self.\
I honor you because of what I am,\
And what He is, Who loves us both as one.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 96 Salvation comes from my One Self**](#part0004.html#level-364) {#part0041_split_016.html#h1-364 .level1}

^1^ Although you are One Self, you experience yourself as two-as both
good and evil, loving and hating, mind and body. This sense of being
split into opposites induces feelings of acute and constant conflict and
leads to frantic attempts to reconcile the contradictory aspects of this
self-perception. You have sought many such solutions, and none of them
has worked. The opposites you see in you will never be compatible. But
one exists.

^2^ The fact that truth and illusion cannot be reconciled, no matter how
you try, what means you use, and where you see the problem, must be
accepted if you would be saved. Until you have accepted this, you will
attempt endless lists of goals you cannot reach; a senseless series of
expenditures of time and effort, hopefulness and doubt, each one as
futile as the one before and failing as the next one surely will.

^3^ Problems that have no meaning cannot be resolved within the
framework they are set. Two selves in conflict could not be resolved,
and good and evil have no meeting place. The self you made can never be
your Self, nor can your Self be split in two and still be what it is and
must forever be.

^4^ A mind and body cannot both exist. Make no attempt to reconcile the
two, for one denies the other can be real. If you are physical, your
mind is gone from your self-concept, for it has no place in which it
could be really part of you. If you are Spirit, then the body must be
meaningless to your reality.

^5^ Spirit makes use of mind as means to find its Self-expression. And
the mind which serves the Spirit is at peace and filled with joy. Its
power comes from Spirit, and it is fulfilling happily its function here.
Yet mind can also see itself divorced from Spirit and perceive itself
within a body it confuses with itself. Without its function then, it has
no peace, and happiness is alien to its thoughts.

^6^ Yet mind apart from Spirit cannot think. It has denied its Source of
strength and sees itself as helpless, limited, and weak. Dissociated
from its function now, it thinks it is alone and separate, attacked by
armies massed against itself and hiding in the body's frail support. Now
must it reconcile unlike with like, for this is what it thinks that it
is for.

^7^ Waste no more time on this. Who can resolve the senseless conflicts
which a dream presents? What could the resolution mean in truth? What
purpose could it serve? What is it for? Salvation cannot make illusions
real and solve a problem that does not exist. Perhaps you hope it can.
Yet would you have God's plan for the release of His dear Son bring pain
to him and fail to set him free?

^8^ Your Self retains its thoughts, and they remain within your mind and
in the Mind of God. The Holy Spirit holds salvation in your mind and
offers it the way to peace. Salvation is a thought you share with God,
because His Voice accepted it for you and answered in your name that it
was done. Thus is salvation kept among the thoughts your Self holds dear
and cherishes for you.

^9^ We will attempt today to find this thought, whose presence in your
mind is guaranteed by Him Who speaks to you from your One Self. Our
hourly five minute practicing will be a search for Him within your mind.
Salvation comes from this One Self through Him Who is the bridge between
your mind and it.

^10^ Wait patiently, and let Him speak to you about your Self, and what
your mind can do, restored to it and free to serve its will.

^11^ Begin by saying this:

*^12^ Salvation comes from my One Self. Its thoughts are mine to use.*

^13^ Then seek its thoughts, and claim them as your own.

^14^ These are your own real thoughts you have denied, and let your mind
go wandering in a world of dreams, to find illusions in their place.
Here are your thoughts, the only ones you have. Salvation is among them;
find it there.

^15^ If you succeed, the thoughts that come to you will tell you you are
saved and that your mind has found the function that it sought to lose.
Your Self will welcome it and give it peace. Restored in strength, it
will again flow out from Spirit to the Spirit in all things created by
the Spirit as Itself. Your mind will bless all things. Confusion done,
you are restored, for you have found your Self.

^16^ Your Self knows that you cannot fail today. Perhaps your mind
remains uncertain yet a little while. Be not dismayed by this. The joy
your Self experiences It will save for you, and it will yet be yours in
full awareness. Every time you spend five minutes of the hour seeking
Him Who joins your mind and Self, you offer Him another treasure to be
kept for you.

^17^ Each time today you tell your frantic mind salvation comes from
your One Self, you lay another treasure in your growing store. And all
of it is given everyone who asks for it and will accept the gift. Think,
then, how much is given unto you to give this day, that it be given you!
:::

[]{#part0041_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 97 I am Spirit**](#part0004.html#level-365) {#part0041_split_017.html#h1-365 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea identifies you with your One Self. It accepts no split
identity, nor tries to weave opposing factors into unity. It simply
states the truth. Practice this truth today as often as you can, for it
will bring your mind from conflict to the quiet fields of peace. No
chill of fear can enter, for your mind has been absolved from madness,
letting go illusions of a split identity.

^2^ We state again the truth about your Self, the holy Son of God who
rests in you, whose mind has been restored to sanity. You are the Spirit
lovingly endowed with all your Father's love and peace and joy. You are
the Spirit which completes Himself and shares His function as Creator.
He is with you always, as you are with Him.

^3^ Today we try to bring reality still closer to your mind. Each time
you practice, awareness is brought a little nearer at least; sometimes a
thousand years or more are saved. The minutes which you give are
multiplied over and over, for the miracle makes use of time but is not
ruled by it. Salvation is a miracle, the first and last; the first that
is the last, for it is one.

^4^ You are the Spirit in whose mind abides the miracle in which all
time stands still; the miracle in which a minute spent in using these
ideas becomes a time which has no length and which has no end. Give,
then, these minutes willingly, and count on Him Who promised to lay
timelessness beside them. He will offer all His strength to every little
effort which you make.

^5^ Give Him the minutes which He needs today to help you understand
with Him you are the Spirit that abides in Him, and Which calls through
His Voice to every living thing; offers His sight to everyone who asks;
replaces error with the simple truth.

^6^The Holy Spirit will be glad to take five minutes of each hour from
your hands and carry them around this aching world, where pain and
misery appear to rule. He will not overlook one open mind that will
accept the healing gift they bring, and He will lay them everywhere He
knows they will be welcome. And they will increase in healing power each
time someone accepts them as his thoughts and uses them to heal.

^7^ Thus will your gift to Him be multiplied a thousand-fold and tens of
thousands more. And when it is returned to you, it will surpass in might
the little gift you gave as much as does the radiance of the sun
outshine the tiny gleam a firefly makes an uncertain moment, and goes
out. Yet will the steady brilliance of this light remain and lead you
out of darkness, nor will you be able to forget the way again.

^8^ Begin these happy exercises with the words the Holy Spirit speaks to
you, and let them echo round the world through Him:

*^9^ Spirit am I, a holy Son of God,\
free of all limits, safe and healed and whole,\
free to forgive, and free to save the world.*

^10^ Expressed through you, the Holy Spirit will accept this gift which
you received of Him, increase its power, and give it back to you.

^11^ Offer each practice period today gladly to Him. And He will speak
to you, reminding you that you are Spirit, one with Him and God, your
brothers and your Self. Listen for His assurance every time you speak
the words He offers you today, and let Him tell your mind that they are
true.

^12^ Use them against temptation, and escape its sorry consequences if
you yield to the belief that you are something else. The Holy Spirit
gives you peace today. Receive His words, and offer them to Him.

::: {#part0041_split_017.html#calibre_pb_18 .calibre7}
:::
:::

[]{#part0041_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 98 I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation**](#part0004.html#level-366) {#part0041_split_018.html#h1-366 .level1}

^1^ Today is a day of special dedication. We take a stand on but one
side today. We side with truth and let illusions go. We will not
vacillate between the two but take a firm position with the one. We
dedicate ourselves to truth today and to salvation as God planned it be.
We will not argue it is something else; we will not seek for it where it
is not. In gladness we accept it as it is and take the part assigned to
us by God.

^2^ How happy to be certain! All our doubts we lay aside today and take
our stand with certainty of purpose and with thanks that doubt is gone
and surety has come. We have a mighty purpose to fulfill and have been
given everything we need with which to reach the goal. Not one mistake
stands in our way, for we have been absolved from errors. All our sins
are washed away by realizing that they were but mistakes.

^3^ The guiltless have no fear, for they are safe and recognize their
safety. They do not appeal to magic nor invent escapes from fancied
threats without reality. They rest in quiet certainty that they will do
what it is given them to do. They do not doubt their own ability because
they know their function will be filled completely in the perfect time
and place. They took the stand which we will take today that we may
share their certainty and thus increase it by accepting it ourselves.

^4^ They will be with us-all who took the stand we take today will
gladly offer us all that they learned and every gain they made. Those
still uncertain too will join with us and, borrowing our certainty, will
make it stronger still. While those as yet unborn will hear the call we
heard and answer it, when they have come to make their choice again. We
do not choose but for ourselves today.

^5^ Is it not worth five minutes of your time each hour to be able to
accept the happiness that God has given you? Is it not worth five
minutes hourly to recognize your special function here? Is not five
minutes of the hour but a small request to make in terms of a reward so
great it has no measure? You have made a thousand losing bargains at the
least.

^6^ Here is an offer guaranteeing you your full release from pain of
every kind and joy the world does not contain. You can exchange a little
of your time for peace of mind and certainty of purpose with the promise
of complete success. And since time has no meaning, you are being asked
for nothing in return for everything. Here is a bargain that you cannot
lose. And what you gain is limitless indeed!

^7^ Each hour today give Him your tiny gift of but five minutes. He will
give the words you use in practicing today's idea the deep conviction
and the certainty you lack. His words will join with yours and make each
repetition of today's idea a total dedication, made in faith as perfect
and as sure as His in you.

^8^ His confidence in you will bring the light to all the words you say,
and you will go beyond their sound to what they really mean. Today you
practice with Him as you say:

*^9^ I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.*

^10^ In each five minutes that you spend with Him, He will accept your
words and give them back to you all bright with faith and confidence so
strong and steady they will light the world with hope and gladness. Do
not lose one chance to be the glad receiver of His gifts, that you may
give them to the world today.

^11^ Give Him the words, and He will do the rest. He will enable you to
understand your special function. He will open up the way to happiness,
and peace and trust will be His gifts, His answer to your words. He will
respond with all His faith and joy and certainty that what you say is
true. And you will have conviction then of Him Who knows the function
that you have on earth as well as Heaven. He will be with you each
practice period you share with Him, exchanging every instant of the time
you offer Him for timelessness and peace.

^12^ Throughout the hour, let your time be spent in happy preparation
for the next five minutes you will spend again with Him. Repeat today's
idea while you wait for the glad time to come to you again. Repeat it
often, and do not forget each time you do so, you have let your mind be
readied for the happy time to come.

^13^ And when the hour is gone and He is there once more to spend a
little time with you, be thankful and lay down all earthly tasks, all
little thoughts and limited ideas, and spend a happy time again with
Him. Tell Him once more that you accept the part which He would have you
take and help you fill, and He will make you sure you want this choice,
which He has made with you and you with Him.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 99 Salvation is my only function here**](#part0004.html#level-367) {#part0041_split_019.html#h1-367 .level1}

^1^ Salvation and forgiveness are the same. They both imply that
something has gone wrong-something you need to be saved from or forgiven
for, something amiss that needs corrective change, something apart or
different from the Will of God. Thus do both terms imply something
impossible but yet which has occurred, resulting in a state of conflict
between what is and what could never be.

^2^ Truth and illusions both are equal now, for both have happened. The
impossible becomes the thing you need forgiveness for, salvation from.
Salvation is the borderland between the truth and illusion. It reflects
the truth because it is the means by which you can escape illusions. Yet
it is not truth because it undoes what was never done.

^3^ How could there be a meeting place at all where earth and Heaven can
be reconciled within a mind where both of them exist? The mind that sees
illusions thinks them real. They have existence in that they are
thoughts. And yet they are not real because the mind that thinks these
thoughts is separate from God.

^4^ What joins the separated mind and thoughts with Mind and Thought
which are forever one? What plan could hold the truth inviolate, yet
recognize the need illusions bring and offer means by which they are
undone without attack and with no touch of pain? What but a Thought of
God could be this plan by which the never done is overlooked and sins
forgotten which were never real?

^5^ The Holy Spirit holds this plan of God exactly as it was received of
Him within the Mind of God and in your own. It is apart from time in
that its Source is timeless. Yet it operates in time because of your
belief that time is real. Unshaken does the Holy Spirit look on what you
see-on sin and pain and death, on grief and separation, and on loss. Yet
does He know one thing must still be true-God still is Love, and this is
not His Will.

^6^ This is the Thought which brings illusions to the truth, and sees
them as appearances behind which is the changeless and the sure. This is
the Thought which saves and which forgives, because it lays no faith in
what is not created by the only Source it knows. This is the Thought
whose function is to save by giving you its function as your own.

^7^ Salvation is your function with the One to Whom the plan was given.
Now are you entrusted with this plan, along with Him. He has one answer
to appearances regardless of their form, their size, their depth, or any
attribute they seem to have:

*^8^ Salvation is my only function here.\
God still is Love, and this is not His Will.*

^9^ You who will yet work miracles, be sure you practice well the idea
for today. Try to perceive the strength in what you say, for these are
words in which your freedom lies. Your Father loves you. All the world
of pain is not His Will. Forgive yourself the thought He wanted this for
you. Then let the Thought with which He has replaced all your mistakes
enter the darkened places of your mind which thought the thoughts that
never were His Will.

^10^ This part belongs to God, as does the rest. It does not think its
solitary thoughts and make them real by hiding them from Him. Let in the
light, and you will look upon no obstacle to what He wills for you. Open
your secrets to His kindly Light, and see how bright this Light still
shines in you.

^11^ Practice His Thought today, and let His Light seek out and lighten
up all darkened spots and shine through them to join them to the rest.
It is God's Will your mind be one with His. It is God's Will that He has
but one Son. It is God's Will that His one Son is you.

^12^ Think of these things in practicing today, and start your longer
practice periods with this instruction in the way of truth:

*^13^ Salvation is my only function here.\
Salvation and forgiveness are the same.*

^14^ Then turn to Him who shares your function with you, and let Him
teach you what you need to learn to lay all fear aside and know your
Self as Love Which has no opposite in you.

^15^ Forgive all thoughts which would oppose the truth of your
completeness, unity, and peace. You cannot lose the gifts your Father
gave. You do not want to be another self. You have no function that is
not of God. Forgive yourself the one you think you made. Forgiveness and
salvation are the same. Forgive what you have made, and you are saved.

^16^ You have a special message for today which has the power to remove
all forms of doubt and fear forever from your mind. If you are tempted
to believe them true, remember that appearances cannot withstand the
truth these mighty words contain:

*^17^ Salvation is my only function here.\
God still is Love, and this is not His Will.*

^18^ Your only function tells you you are one. Remind yourself of this
between the times you give five minutes to be shared with Him Who shares
God's plan with you. Remind yourself:

*^19^ Salvation is my only function here.*

^20^ Thus do you lay forgiveness on your mind and let all fear be gently
laid aside that Love may find Its rightful place in you and show you
that you are the Son of God.

::: {#part0041_split_019.html#calibre_pb_21 .calibre7}
:::
:::

[]{#part0041_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 100 My part is essential to God's plan for salvation**](#part0004.html#level-368) {#part0041_split_020.html#h1-368 .level1}

^1^ Just as God's Son completes his Father, so your part in it completes
your Father's plan. Salvation must reverse the mad belief in separate
thoughts and separate bodies which lead separate lives and go their
separate ways. One function shared by separate minds unites them in one
purpose, for each one is equally essential to them all.

^2^ God's Will for you is perfect happiness. Why should you choose to go
against His Will? The part that He has saved for you to take in working
out His plan is given you that you might be restored to what He wills.
This part is as essential to His plan as to your happiness. Your joy
must be complete to let His plan be understood by those to whom He sends
you. They will see their function in your shining face and hear God
calling to them in your happy laugh.

^3^ You are indeed essential to God's plan. Without your joy, His joy is
incomplete. Without your smile, the world cannot be saved. While you are
sad, the light which God Himself appointed as the means to save the
world is dim and lusterless. And no one laughs, because all laughter can
but echo yours.

^4^ You are indeed essential to God's plan. Just as your light increases
every light that shines in Heaven, so your joy on earth calls to all
minds to let their sorrows go and take their place beside you in God's
plan. God's messengers are joyous, and their joy heals sorrow and
despair. They are the proof that God wills perfect happiness for all who
will accept their Father's gifts as theirs.

^5^ We will not let ourselves be sad today. For if we do, we fail to
take the part that is essential to God's plan as well as to our vision.
Sadness is the sign that you would play another part instead of what has
been assigned to you by God. Thus do you fail to show the world how
great the happiness He wills for you. And so you do not recognize that
it is yours.

^6^ Today we will attempt to understand joy is our function here. If you
are sad, your part is unfulfilled and all the world is thus deprived of
joy along with you. God asks that you be happy so the world can see how
much He loves His Son and wills no sorrow rises to abate his joy; no
fear besets him to disturb his peace.

^7^ You are God's messenger today. You bring His happiness to all you
look upon, His peace to everyone who looks on you and sees His message
in your happy face. We will prepare ourselves for this today in our five
minute practice periods by feeling happiness arise in us according to
our Father's Will and ours.

^8^ Begin the exercises with the thought today's idea contains. Then
realize your part is to be happy. Only this is asked of you or anyone
who wants to take his place among God's messengers. Think what this
means. You have indeed been wrong in your belief that sacrifice is
asked. You but receive according to God's plan and never lose or
sacrifice or die.

^9^ Now let us try to find that joy which proves to us and all the world
God's Will for us. It is your function that you find it here and that
you find it now. For this you came. Let this one be the day that you
succeed! Look deep within you, undismayed by all the little thoughts and
foolish goals you pass as you ascend to meet the Christ in you.

^10^ He will be there. And you can reach Him now. What could you rather
look upon in place of Him Who waits that you may look on Him? What
little thought has power to hold you back? What foolish goal can keep
you from success when He Who calls to you is God Himself? He will be
there. You are essential to His plan. You are His messenger today. And
you must find what He would have you give.

^11^ Do not forget the idea for today between your longer practice
periods. It is your Self Who calls to you today. And it is Him you
answer every time you tell yourself you are essential to God's plan for
the salvation of the world.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 101 God's Will for me is perfect happiness**](#part0004.html#level-369) {#part0041_split_021.html#h1-369 .level1}

^1^ Today we will continue with the theme of happiness. This is a key
idea in understanding what salvation means. You still believe it asks
for suffering as penance for your "sins." This is not so. Yet you must
think it so while you believe that sin is real and that God's Son can
sin. If sin is real, then punishment is just and cannot be escaped.
Salvation thus cannot be purchased but through suffering.

^2^ If sin is real then happiness must be illusion, for they cannot both
be true. The sinful warrant only death and pain, and it is this they ask
for, for they know it waits for them and it will seek them out and find
them somewhere, sometime, in some form which evens the account they owe
to God. They would escape Him in their fear. And yet He will pursue, and
they cannot escape.

^3^ If sin is real, salvation must be pain. Pain is the cost of sin, and
suffering can never be escaped if sin is real. Salvation must be feared,
for it will kill but slowly, taking everything away before it grants the
welcome boon of death to victims who are little more than bones before
salvation is appeased. Its wrath is boundless, merciless, but wholly
just.

4 Who would seek out such savage punishment? Who would not flee
salvation and attempt in every way he can to drown the Voice Which
offers it to him? Why would he try to listen and accept Its offering? If
sin is real, its offering is death and meted out in cruel form to match
the vicious wishes in which sin is born. If sin is real, salvation has
become your bitter enemy, the curse of God upon you who have crucified
His Son.

^5^ You need the practice periods today. The exercises teach sin is not
real, and all that you believe must come from sin will never happen, for
it has no cause. Accept Atonement with an open mind which cherishes no
lingering belief that you have made a devil of God's Son.

^6^ There is no sin. We practice with this thought as often as we can
today because it is the basis for today's idea. God's Will for you is
perfect happiness because there is no sin, and suffering is causeless.
Joy is just, and pain is but the sign you have misunderstood yourself.

^7^ Fear not the Will of God. But turn to it in confidence that it will
set you free from all the consequences sin has wrought in feverish
imagination. Say:

*^8^ God's Will for me is perfect happiness.\
There is no sin; it has no consequence.*

^9^ So should you start your practice periods, and then attempt again to
find the joy these thoughts will introduce into your mind. Give these
five minutes gladly to remove the heavy load you laid upon yourself with
the insane belief that sin is real.

^10^ Today escape from madness. You are set on freedom's road, and now
today's idea brings wings to speed you on and hope to go still faster to
the waiting goal of peace. There is no sin. Remember this today, and
tell yourself as often as you can:

*^11^ God's Will for me is perfect happiness.\
This is the truth because there is no sin.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 102 I share God's Will for happiness for me**](#part0004.html#level-370) {#part0041_split_022.html#h1-370 .level1}

^1^ You do not want to suffer. You may think it buys you something and
may still believe a little that it buys you what you want. Yet this
belief is surely shaken now, at least enough to let you question it and
to suspect it really makes no sense. It has not gone as yet but lacks
the roots that once secured it tightly to the dark and hidden secret
places of your mind.

^2^ Today we try to loose its weakened hold still further. And to
realize that pain is purposeless, without a cause, and with no power to
accomplish anything. It cannot purchase anything at all. It offers
nothing and does not exist. And everything you think it offers you is
lacking in existence like itself. You have been slave to nothing. Be you
free today to join the happy Will of God.

^3^ For several days we will continue to devote our longer practice
periods to exercises planned to help you reach the happiness God's Will
has placed in you. Here is your home, and here your safety is. Here is
your peace, and here there is no fear. Here is salvation. Here is rest
at last.

^4^ Begin the longer practice periods today with this acceptance of
God's Will for you:

*^5^ I share God's Will for happiness for me,\
And I accept it as my function now.*

^6^ Then seek this function deep within your mind, for it is there,
awaiting but your choice. You cannot fail to find it when you learn it
is your choice and that you share God's Will.

^7^ Be happy, for your only function here is happiness. You have no need
to be less loving to God's Son than He Whose Love created him as loving
as Himself. Besides these hourly five minute rests, pause frequently
today to tell yourself that you have now accepted happiness as your one
function. And be sure that you are joining with God's Will in doing
this.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 103 God, being Love, is also happiness**](#part0004.html#level-371) {#part0041_split_023.html#h1-371 .level1}

^1^ Happiness is an attribute of love. It cannot be apart from it, nor
can it be experienced where love is not. Love has no limits, being
everywhere. And therefore joy is everywhere as well. Yet can the mind
deny that this is so, believing there are gaps in love where sin can
enter, bringing pain instead of joy.

^2^ This strange belief would limit happiness by redefining love as
limited and introducing opposition in what has no limit and no opposite.
Fear is associated then with love, and its results become the heritage
of minds that think what they have made is real. These images, with no
reality in truth, bear witness to the fear of God, forgetting being
Love, He must be joy.

^3^ This basic error we will try again to bring to truth today and teach
ourselves:

*^4^ God, being Love, is also happiness.\
To fear Him is to be afraid of joy.*

^5^ Begin your longer practice periods for today with this association,
which corrects the false belief that God is fear. It also emphasizes
happiness belongs to you because of what He is.

^6^ Allow this one correction to be placed within your mind each waking
hour today. Then welcome all the happiness it brings, as truth replaces
fear, and joy becomes what you expect to take the place of pain. God
being Love, it will be given you. Bolster this expectation frequently
throughout the day, and quiet all your fears with this assurance, kind
and wholly true:

*^7^ God, being Love, is also happiness.\
And it is happiness I seek today.\
I cannot fail because I seek the truth.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 104 I seek but what belongs to me in truth**](#part0004.html#level-372) {#part0041_split_024.html#h1-372 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea continues with the thought that joy and peace are not
but idle dreams. They are your right because of what you are. They come
to you from God, Who cannot fail to give you what He wills. Yet must
there be a place made ready to receive His gifts. They are not welcomed
gladly by a mind which has instead received the gifts it made where His
belong, as substitutes for them.

^2^ Today we would remove all meaningless and self-made gifts which we
have placed upon the holy altar where God's gifts belong. These are the
gifts which are our own in truth. His are the gifts which we inherited
before time was and which will still be ours when time has passed into
eternity.

^3^ These are the gifts which are within us now, for they are timeless.
And we need not wait to have them. They belong to us today. Therefore we
will to have them now and know in choosing them in place of what we made
we but unite our will with what God wills and recognize the same as
being one.

^4^ Our longer practice periods today, the hourly five minutes given
truth for your salvation, should begin with this:

*^5^ I seek but what belongs to me in truth,\
And joy and peace are my inheritance.*

^6^ Then lay aside the conflicts of the world that offer other gifts and
other goals made of illusions, witnessed to by them, and sought for only
in a world of dreams. All this we lay aside and seek instead that which
is truly ours, as we ask to recognize what God has given us.

^7^ We clear a holy place within our minds before His altar, where His
gifts of peace and joy are welcome and to which we come to find what has
been given us by Him. We come in confidence today, aware that what
belongs to us in truth is what He gives. And we would wish for nothing
else, for nothing else belongs to us in truth.

^8^ So do we clear the way for Him today by simply recognizing that His
Will is done already and that joy and peace belong to us as His eternal
gifts. We will not let ourselves lose sight of them between the times we
come to seek for them where He has laid them. This reminder will we
bring to mind as often as we can:

*^9^ I seek but what belongs to me in truth.\
God's gifts of joy and peace are all I want.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 105 God's peace and joy are mine**](#part0004.html#level-373) {#part0041_split_025.html#h1-373 .level1}

^1^ God's peace and joy are yours. Today we will accept them, knowing
they belong to us. And we will try to understand these gifts increase as
we receive them. They are not like to the gifts the world can give, in
which the giver loses as he gives the gift; the taker is the richer by
his loss. These are not gifts, but bargains made with guilt.

^2^ The truly given gift entails no loss. It is impossible that one can
gain because another loses. This implies a limit and an insufficiency.
No gift is given thus. Such "gifts" are but a bid for a more valuable
return-a loan with interest to be paid in full; a temporary lending,
meant to be a pledge of debt to be repaid with more than was received by
him who took the gift.

^3^ This strange distortion of what giving means pervades all levels of
the world you see. It strips all meaning from the gifts you give and
leaves you nothing in the ones you take. A major learning goal this
course has set is to reverse your view of giving, so you can receive.
For giving has become a source of fear, and so you would avoid the only
means by which you can receive.

^4^ Accept God's peace and joy, and you will learn a different way of
looking at a gift. God's gifts will never lessen when they are given
away. They but increase thereby. As Heaven's peace and joy intensify
when you accept them as God's gift to you, so does the joy of your
Creator grow when you accept His joy and peace as yours.

^5^ True giving is creation. It extends the limitless to the unlimited,
eternity to timelessness, and love unto itself. It adds to all that is
complete already, not in simple terms of adding more, for that implies
that it was less before. It adds by letting what cannot contain itself
fulfill its aim of giving everything it has away, securing it forever
for itself.

^6^ Today accept God's peace and joy as yours. Let Him complete Himself
as He defines completion. You will understand that what completes Him
must complete His Son as well. He cannot give through loss. No more can
you. Receive His gift of joy and peace today, and He will thank you for
your gift to Him.

^7^ Today our practice periods will start a little differently. Begin
today by thinking of those brothers who have been denied by you the
peace and joy that are their right under the equal laws of God. Here you
denied them to yourself. And here you must return to claim them as your
own. Think of your "enemies" a little while, and tell each one as he
occurs to you:

*^8^ My brother, peace and joy I offer you,\
That I may have God's peace and joy as mine.*

^9^ Thus you prepare yourself to recognize God's gifts to you and let
your mind be free of all that would prevent success today. Now are you
ready to accept the gift of peace and joy which God has given you. Now
are you ready to experience the joy and peace you have denied yourself.
Now you can say, "God's peace and joy are mine," for you have given what
you would receive.

^10^ You must succeed today if you prepare your mind as we suggest, for
you have let all bars to peace and joy be lifted up, and what is yours
can come to you at last. So tell yourself "God's peace and joy are
mine," and close your eyes a while, and let His Voice assure you that
the words you speak are true.

^11^ Spend your five minutes thus with Him each time you can today, but
do not think that less is worthless when you cannot give Him more. At
least remember hourly to say the words which call on Him to give you
what He wills to give and wills you to receive.

^12^ Determine not to interfere today with what He wills. And if a
brother seems to tempt you to deny God's gift to him, see it as but
another chance to let yourself receive the gifts of God as yours. Then
bless your brother thankfully, and say:

*^13^ My brother, peace and joy I offer you,\
That I may have God's peace and joy as mine.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 106 Let me be still and listen to the truth**](#part0004.html#level-374) {#part0041_split_026.html#h1-374 .level1}

^1^ If you will lay aside the ego's voice, however loudly it may seem to
call; if you will not accept its petty gifts which give you nothing that
you really want; if you will listen with an open mind, which has not
told you what salvation is; then you will hear the mighty Voice of
truth, quiet in power, strong in stillness, and completely certain in
its messages.

^2^ Listen, and hear your Father speak to you through His appointed
Voice, Which silences the thunder of the meaningless and shows the way
to peace to those who cannot see. Be still today and listen to the
truth. Be not deceived by voices of the dead which tell you they have
found the source of life and offer it to you for your belief. Attend
them not, but listen to the truth.

^3^ Be not afraid today to circumvent the voices of the world; walk
lightly past their meaningless persuasion. Hear them not. Be still
today, and listen to the truth. Go past all things which do not speak of
Him Who holds your happiness within His hand, held out to you in welcome
and in love. Hear only Him today, and do not wait to reach Him longer.
Hear one Voice today.

^4^ Today the promise of God's Word is kept. Hear and be silent. He
would speak to you. He comes with miracles a thousand times as happy and
as wonderful as those you ever dreamt or wished for in your dreams. His
miracles are true. They will not fade when dreaming ends. They end the
dream instead and last forever, for they come from God to His dear Son,
whose other name is you.

^5^ Prepare yourself for miracles today. Today allow your Father's
ancient pledge to you and all your brothers to be kept. Hear Him today,
and listen to the Word which lifts the veil which lies upon the earth
and wakes all those who sleep and cannot see. God calls to them through
you. He needs your voice to speak to them, for who could reach God's Son
except his Father calling through your Self?

^6^ Hear Him today, and offer Him your voice to speak to all the
multitudes who wait to hear the Word that He will speak today. Be ready
for salvation. It is here and will today be given unto you. And you will
learn your function from the One Who chose it in your Father's Name for
you.

^7^ Listen today, and you will hear a Voice Which will resound
throughout the world through you. The Bringer of all miracles has need
that you receive them first and thus become the joyous giver of what you
received. Thus does salvation start and thus it ends; when everything is
yours, and everything is given away, it will remain with you forever.
And the Lesson has been learned.

^8^ Today we practice giving, not the way you understand it now, but as
it is. The longer exercises should begin with this request for your
enlightenment:

*^9^ I will be still and listen to the truth.\
What does it mean to give and to receive?*

^10^ Ask and expect an answer. Your request is one whose answer has been
waiting long to be received by you. It will begin the ministry for which
you came and which will free the world from thinking giving is a way to
lose. And so the world becomes ready to understand and to receive.

^11^ Be still and listen to the truth today. For each five minutes spent
in listening, a thousand minds are opened to the truth. And they will
hear the holy Word you hear. And when the hour is past, you will again
release a thousand more who pause to ask that truth be given them along
with you.

^12^ Today the holy Word of God is kept through your receiving it to
give away, so you can teach the world what giving means by listening and
learning it of Him. Do not forget today to reinforce your choice to hear
and to receive the Word by this reminder, given to yourself as often as
is possible today:

*^13^ Let me be still and listen to the truth.\
I am the messenger of God today.\
My voice is His, to give what I receive.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 107 Truth will correct the errors in my mind**](#part0004.html#level-375) {#part0041_split_027.html#h1-375 .level1}

^1^ What can correct illusions but the truth? And what are errors but
illusions that remain unrecognized for what they are? Where truth has
entered, errors disappear. They merely vanish, leaving not a trace by
which to be remembered. They are gone because without belief they have
no life, and so they disappear to nothingness, returning whence they
came. From dust to dust they come and go, for only truth remains.

^2^ Can you imagine what a state of mind without illusions is? How it
would feel? Try to remember when there was a time-perhaps a minute,
maybe even less-when nothing came to interrupt your peace; when you were
certain you were loved and safe. Then try to picture what it would be
like to have that moment be extended to the end of time and to eternity.

^3^ Then let the sense of quiet that you felt be multiplied a hundred
times and then be multiplied another hundred more. And now you have a
hint, not more than just the faintest intimation of the state your mind
will rest in when the truth has come.

^4^ Without illusions there could be no fear, no doubt, and no attack.
When truth has come, all pain is over, for there is no room for
transitory thoughts and dead ideas to linger in your mind. Truth
occupies your mind completely, liberating you from all beliefs in the
ephemeral. They have no place because the truth has come, and they are
nowhere. They cannot be found, for truth is everywhere forever now.

^5^ When truth has come, it does not stay a while to disappear or change
to something else. It does not shift and alter in its form, nor come and
go and go and come again. It stays exactly as it always was, to be
depended on in every need and trusted with a perfect trust in all the
seeming difficulties and the doubts that the appearances the world
presents engender. They will merely flow away when truth corrects the
errors in your mind.

^6^ When truth has come, it harbours in its wings the gift of perfect
constancy and love which does not falter in the face of pain but looks
beyond it, steadily and sure. Here is the gift of healing, for the truth
needs no defense, and therefore no attack is possible. Illusions can be
brought to truth to be corrected. But the truth stands far beyond
illusions and cannot be brought to them to turn them into truth.

^7^ Truth does not come and go nor shift nor change, in this appearance
now and then in that, evading capture and escaping grasp. It does not
hide. It stands in open light, in obvious accessibility. It is
impossible that anyone could seek it truly and would not succeed.

^8^ Today belongs to truth. Give truth its due, and it will give you
yours. You were not meant to suffer and to die. Your Father wills these
dreams be gone. Let truth correct them all. We do not ask for what we do
not have. We merely ask for what belongs to us, that we may recognize it
as our own.

^9^ Today we practice on the happy note of certainty that has been born
of truth. The shaky and unsteady footsteps of illusion is not our
approach today. We are as certain of success as we are sure we live and
hope and breathe and think. We do not doubt we walk with truth today and
count on it to enter into all the exercises that we do this day.

^10^ Begin by asking Him Who goes with you upon this undertaking that He
be in your awareness as you go with Him. You are not made of flesh and
blood and bone but were created by the self-same Thought which gave the
gift of life to Him as well. He is your Brother and so like to you your
Father knows that you are both the same. It is your Self you ask to go
with you, and how could He be absent where you are?

^11^ Truth will correct all errors in your mind which tell you you could
be apart from Him. You speak to Him today and make your pledge to let
His function be fulfilled through you. To share His function is to share
His joy. His confidence is with you, as you say:

*^12^ Truth will correct all errors in my mind,\
And I will rest in Him Who is my Self.*

^13^ Then let Him lead you gently to the truth which will envelop you
and give you peace so deep and tranquil that you will return to the
familiar world reluctantly.

^14^ And yet you will be glad to look again upon this world. For you
will bring with you the promise of the changes which the truth that goes
with you will carry to the world. They will increase with every gift you
give of five small minutes, and the errors that surround the world will
be corrected as you let them be corrected in your mind.

^15^ Do not forget your function for today. Each time you tell yourself
with confidence, "Truth will correct all errors in my mind," you speak
for all the world and Him Who would release the world as He would set
you free.
:::

[]{#part0041_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 108 To give and to receive are one in truth**](#part0004.html#level-376) {#part0041_split_028.html#h1-376 .level1}

^1^ Vision depends upon today's idea. The light is in it, for it
reconciles all seeming opposites. And what is light except the
resolution, born of peace, of all your conflicts and mistaken thoughts
into one concept which is wholly true? Even that one will disappear
because the Thought behind it will appear instead, to take its place.
And now we are at peace forever, for the dream is over now.

^2^ True light which makes true vision possible is not the light the
body's eyes behold. It is a state of mind which has become so unified
that darkness cannot be perceived at all. And thus what is the same is
seen as one, while what is not the same remains unnoticed, for it is not
there.

^3^ This is the light which shows no opposites, and vision, being
healed, has power to heal. This is the light that brings your peace of
mind to other minds, to share it and be glad that they are one with you
and with themselves. This is the light which heals because it brings
single perception, based upon one frame of reference from which one
meaning comes.

^4^ Here are both giving and receiving seen as different aspects of one
Thought Whose truth does not depend on which is seen as first, nor which
appears to be in second place. Here it is understood that both occur
together, that the Thought remain complete. And in this understanding is
the base on which all opposites are reconciled because they are
perceived from the same frame of reference which unifies this Thought.

^5^ One thought, completely unified, will serve to unify all thought.
This is the same as saying one correction will suffice for all
correction or that to forgive one brother wholly is enough to bring
salvation to all minds. For these are but some special cases of one law
which holds for every kind of learning if it be directed by the One Who
knows the truth.

^6^ To learn that giving and receiving are the same has special
usefulness because it can be tried so easily and seen as true. And when
this special case has proved it always works in every circumstance where
it is tried, the thought behind it can be generalized to other areas of
doubt and double vision. And from there it will extend and finally
arrive at the one Thought Which underlies them all.

^7^ Today we practice with the special case of giving and receiving. We
will use this simple Lesson in the obvious because it has results we
cannot miss. To give is to receive. Today we will attempt to offer peace
to everyone and see how quickly peace returns to us. Light is
tranquillity, and in that peace is vision given us and we can see.

^8^ So we begin the practice periods with the instruction for today and
say:

*^9^ To give and to receive are one in truth.\
I will receive what I am giving now.*

^10^ Then close your eyes, and for five minutes think of what you would
hold out to everyone to have it yours. You might, for instance, say:

*^11^ To everyone I offer quietness.\
To everyone I offer peace of mind.\
To everyone I offer gentleness.*

^12^ Say each one slowly, and then pause a while, expecting to receive
the gift you gave, and it will come to you in the amount in which you
gave it. You will find you have exact return, for this is what you
asked. It might be helpful, too, to think of one to whom to give your
gifts. He represents the others, and through him you give to all.

^13^ Our very simple lesson for today will teach you much. Effect and
cause will be far better understood from this time on, and we will make
much faster progress now. Think of the exercises for today as quick
advances in your learning, made still faster and more sure each time you
say:

*^14^ To give and to receive are one in truth.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 109 I rest in God**](#part0004.html#level-377) {#part0041_split_029.html#h1-377 .level1}

^1^ We ask for rest today and quietness unshaken by the world's
appearances. We ask for peace and stillness in the midst of all the
turmoil born of clashing dreams. We ask for safety and for happiness,
although we seem to look on danger and on sorrow. And we have the
thought that will answer our asking with what we request.

^2^ I rest in God." This thought will bring to you the rest and quiet,
peace and stillness, and the safety and the happiness you seek. "I rest
in God." This thought has power to wake the sleeping truth in you, whose
vision sees beyond appearances to that same truth in everyone and
everything there is. Here is the end of suffering for all the world and
everyone who ever came and yet will come to linger for a while. Here is
the thought in which the Son of God is born again, to recognize himself.

^3^ I rest in God." Completely undismayed this thought will carry you
through storms and strife, past misery and pain, past loss and death,
and onward to the certainty of God. There is no suffering it cannot
heal. There is no problem which it cannot solve. And no appearance but
will turn to truth before the eyes of you who rest in God.

^4^ This is the day of peace. You rest in God, and while the world is
torn by winds of hate, your rest remains completely undisturbed. Yours
is the rest of truth. Appearances cannot intrude on you. You call to all
to join you in your rest, and they will hear and come to you because you
rest in God. They will not hear another voice but yours because you gave
your voice to God and now you rest in Him and let Him speak through you.

^5^ In Him you have no cares and no concerns, no burdens, no anxiety, no
pain, no fear of future, and no past regrets. In timelessness you rest,
while time goes by without its touch upon you, for your rest can never
change in any way at all.

^6^ You rest today. And as you close your eyes, sink into stillness. Let
these periods of rest and respite reassure your mind that all its
frantic fantasies were but the dreams of fever that has passed away. Let
it be still and thankfully accept its healing. No more fearful dreams
will come now that you rest in God. Take time today to slip away from
dreams and into peace.

^7^ Each hour that you take your rest today, a tired mind is suddenly
made glad, a bird with broken wings begins to sing, a stream long dry
begins to flow again. The world is born again each time you rest, and
hourly remember that you came to bring the peace of God into the world
that it might take its rest along with you.

^8^With each five minutes that you rest today the world is nearer
waking. And the time when rest will be the only thing there is comes
closer to all worn and tired minds, too weary now to go their way alone.
And they will hear the bird begin to sing and see the stream begin to
flow again, with hope reborn and energy restored to walk with lightened
steps along the road that suddenly seems easy as they go.

^9^ You rest within the peace of God today and call upon your brothers
from your rest, to draw them to their rest along with you. You will be
faithful to your trust today, forgetting no one, bringing everyone into
the boundless circle of your peace, the holy sanctuary where you rest.

^10^ Open the temple doors, and let them come from far across the world,
and near as well-your distant brothers and your closest friends-bid them
all enter here and rest with you. You rest within the peace of God
today, quiet and unafraid. Each brother comes to take his rest and offer
it to you.

^11^ We rest together here, for thus our rest is made complete, and what
we give today we have received already. Time is not the guardian of what
we give today. We give to those unborn and those passed by, to every
Thought of God, and to the Mind in Which these Thoughts were born and
where they rest. And we remind them of their resting place each time we
tell ourselves,

*^12^ I rest in God.*
:::

[]{#part0041_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 110 I am as God created me**](#part0004.html#level-378) {#part0041_split_030.html#h1-378 .level1}

^1^We will repeat today's idea from time to time. For this one thought
would be enough to save you and the world if you believed that it is
true. Its truth would mean that you have made no changes in yourself
which have reality, nor changed the universe so that what God created
was replaced by fear and evil, misery and death.

^2^ If you remain as God created you, fear has no meaning, evil is not
real, and misery and death do not exist. Today's idea is therefore all
you need to let complete correction heal your mind and give you perfect
vision which will heal all the mistakes that any mind has made at any
time or place. It is enough to heal the past and make the future free.
It is enough to let the present be accepted as it is. It is enough to
let time be the means for all the world to learn escape from time and
every change that time appears to bring in passing by.

^3^ If you remain as God created you, appearances cannot replace the
truth, health cannot turn to sickness, nor can death be substitute for
life or fear for love. All this has not occurred if you remain as God
created you. You need no thought but just this one to let redemption
come to light the world and free it from the past.

^4^ In this one thought is all the past undone; the present saved to
quietly extend into a timeless future. If you are as God created you,
then there has been no separation of your mind from His, no split
between your mind and other minds, and only unity within your own.

^5^ The healing power of today's idea is limitless. It is the birthplace
of all miracles, the great restorer of the truth to the awareness of the
world. Practice today's idea with gratitude. This is the truth that
comes to set you free. This is the truth that God has promised you. This
is the Word in which all sorrow ends.

^6^ For your five minute practice periods, begin with this quotation
from the text:

*^7^ I am as God created me. His Son can suffer nothing.\
And I am His Son.*

^8^ Then, with this statement firmly in your mind, try to discover in
your mind the Self Who is the holy Son of God Himself. Seek Him within
you Who is Christ in you, the Son of God and brother to the world-the
savior who has been forever saved, with power to save whoever touches
Him however lightly, asking for the Word that tells him he is brother
unto Him.

^9^ You are as God created you. Today honor your Self. Let graven images
you made to be the Son of God instead of what He is be worshipped not
today. Deep in your mind the holy Christ in you is waiting your
acknowledgment as you. And you are lost and do not know yourself while
He is unacknowledged and unknown.

^10^ Seek Him today, and find Him. He will be your savior from all idols
you have made. For when you find Him you will understand how worthless
are your idols and how false the images which you believed were you.
Today we make a great advance to truth by letting idols go and opening
our hands and hearts and minds to God today.

^11^ We will remember Him throughout the day with thankful hearts and
loving thoughts for all who meet with us today, for it is thus that we
remember Him. And we will say, that we may be reminded of His Son, our
holy Self, the Christ in each of us:

*^12^ I am as God created me.*

^13^ Let us declare this truth as often as we can. This is the Word of
God that sets you free. This is the key that opens up the gate of
Heaven, and which lets you enter in the peace of God and His eternity.
:::

[]{#part0042_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review III**](#part0004.html#parta-3) {#part0042_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R3:1^ Our third review begins today. We will review two of the last 20
ideas each day until we have reviewed them all. We will observe a
special format for these practice periods which you are urged to follow
as closely as you can. We understand, of course, that it may be
impossible for you to undertake what is suggested here as optimal each
day and every hour of the day.

^2^ Learning will not be hampered when you miss a practice period
because it is impossible at the appointed time. Nor is it necessary that
you make excessive efforts to be sure that you catch up in terms of
numbers. Rituals are not our aim and would defeat our learning goal.

^3^ But learning will be hampered when you skip a practice period
because you are unwilling to devote the time to it which you are asked
to give. Do not deceive yourself in this. Unwillingness can be most
carefully concealed behind a cloak of situations you cannot control.
Learn to distinguish situations which are poorly suited to your
practicing from those which you establish to uphold a camouflage for
your unwillingness.

^4^ Those practice periods which you have lost because you did not want
to do them for whatever reason should be done as soon as you have
changed your mind about your goal. You are unwilling to cooperate in
practicing salvation only if it interferes with goals you hold more
dear. When you withdraw the value given them, allow your practice
periods to be replacements for your litanies to them. They gave you
nothing. But your practice periods offer you everything. Accept their
offering and be at peace.

^5^ The format you should use for these reviews is this: devote five
minutes twice a day or longer if you would prefer to contemplating the
ideas assigned. Read over the ideas and comments which are written first
in each day's exercises. Then begin to think about them quietly, letting
your mind relate them to your needs, your seeming problems, and all your
concerns.

^6^ Place the ideas within your mind, and let it use them as it chooses.
Give it faith that it will use them wisely, being helped in its
decisions by the One Who gave the thoughts to you. What can you trust
but what is in your mind? Have faith, in these reviews, the means the
Holy Spirit uses will not fail. The wisdom of your mind will come to
your assistance. Give it direction at the start, then lean back in quiet
faith, and let it use the ideas you have given it as they were given
you.

^7^ You have been given them in perfect trust, in perfect confidence
that you would use them well, in perfect faith that you would understand
their messages and use them for yourself. Offer them to your mind in
that same trust and confidence and faith. It will not fail. It is the
Holy Spirit's chosen means for your salvation. And with His trust merits
yours as well.

^8^ We emphasize the benefits to you if you devote the first five
minutes of the day to your review and also give the last five minutes of
your waking day to it. If this cannot be done, at least try to divide
them so you undertake one in the morning, and the other in the hour just
before you go to sleep.

^9^ The exercises to be done throughout the day are equally important
and perhaps of even greater value. You have been inclined to do the
exercises and then go on to other things, without applying what you
learned to them. As a result, your learning has had little
reinforcement, and you have not given it the opportunity to prove its
worth to you.

^10^ Here is another chance to use it well. In these reviews we stress
the need to let your learning not lie idly by between your longer
practice periods. Attempt to give your daily two ideas a brief but
serious review each hour. Use one on the hour and the other one a half
an hour later. You need not give more than just a moment to each one.

^11^ Repeat it, and allow your mind to rest a little time in silence and
in peace. Then turn to other things, but try to keep the thought with
you and let it serve to help you keep your peace throughout the day. If
you are shaken, think of it again. These practice periods are planned to
help you form the habit of applying what you learn each day to
everything you do.

^12^ Do not repeat it and then lay it down. Its usefulness is limitless
to you. And it is meant to serve you in all ways, all times and places,
and whenever you need help of any kind. Try, then, to take it with you
in the business of the day and make it holy, worthy of God's Son,
acceptable to God and to your Self.

^13^ Each day's review assignment will conclude with a restatement of
the thought to use each hour and the one to be applied on each half hour
as well. Forget them not. This second chance with each of these ideas
will bring such large advances that we come from these reviews with
learning gains so great that we begin again on solid ground.

^14^ Do not forget how little you have learned. Do not forget how much
you can learn now. Do not forget your Father's need of you as you review
these thoughts He gave to you.
:::

[]{#part0042_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 111**](#part0004.html#level-379) {#part0042_split_001.html#h1-379 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[91\] Miracles are seen in light.

*^2^ I cannot see in darkness. Let the light\
Of holiness and truth light up my mind,\
And let me see the innocence within.*

\[92\] Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.

*^3^ I see through strength, the gift of God to me.\
My weakness is the dark His gift dispels\
By giving me His strength to take its place.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ Miracles are seen in light.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 112**](#part0004.html#level-380) {#part0042_split_002.html#h1-380 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[93\] Light and joy and peace abide in me.

*^2^ I am the home of light and joy and peace.\
I welcome them into the home I share\
With God because I am a part of Him.*

\[94\] I am as God created me.

*^3^ I will remain forever as I was,\
Created by the Changeless like Himself.\
And I am one with Him, and He with me.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ Light and joy and peace abide in me.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ I am as God created me.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 113**](#part0004.html#level-381) {#part0042_split_003.html#h1-381 .level1}

^1^For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[95\] I am One Self, united with my Creator.

*^2^ Serenity and perfect peace are mine\
Because I am One Self, completely whole,\
At one with all creation and with God.*

\[96\] Salvation comes from my One Self.

*^3^ From my One Self, Whose knowledge still remains\
Within my mind, I see God's perfect plan\
For my salvation perfectly fulfilled.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ I am One Self, united with my Creator.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ Salvation comes from my One Self.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 114**](#part0004.html#level-382) {#part0042_split_004.html#h1-382 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[97\] I am Spirit.

*^2^ I am the Son of God. No body can\
Contain my spirit nor impose on me\
A limitation God created not.*

\[98\] I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.

*^3^ What can my function be but to accept\
The Word of God, Who has created me,\
For what I am and will forever be?*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ I am Spirit.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 115**](#part0004.html#level-383) {#part0042_split_005.html#h1-383 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
**\[99\] Salvation is my only function here**

*^2^ My function here is to forgive the world\
For all the errors I have made. For thus\
Am I released from them with all the world.*

**\[100\] My part is essential to God's plan for salvation**

*^3^ I am essential to the plan of God\
For the salvation of the world. For He\
Gave me His plan that I might save the world.*

^4^ On the hour:

*^5^ Salvation is my only function here.*

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ My part is essential to God's plan for salvation.*
:::
:::

[]{#part0042_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 116**](#part0004.html#level-384) {#part0042_split_006.html#h1-384 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[101\] God's Will for me is perfect happiness.

*^2^ God's Will is perfect happiness for me.\
And I can suffer but from the belief\
There is another will apart from His.*

\[102\] I share God's Will for happiness for me.

*^3^ I share my Father's Will for me, His Son.\
What He has given me is all I want.\
What He has given me is all there is.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ God's Will for me is perfect happiness.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^7^ I share God's Will for happiness for me.*
:::
:::

[]{#part0042_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 117**](#part0004.html#level-385) {#part0042_split_007.html#h1-385 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[103\] God, being Love, is also happiness**.**

*^2^ Let me remember love is happiness\
And nothing else brings joy. And so I choose\
To entertain no substitutes for love.*

\[104\] I seek but what belongs to me in truth.

*^3^ Love is my heritage and with it joy.\
These are the gifts my Father gave to me.\
I would accept all that is mine in truth.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ God, being Love, is also happiness.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^7^ I seek but what belongs to me in truth.*
:::
:::

[]{#part0042_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 118**](#part0004.html#level-386) {#part0042_split_008.html#h1-386 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[105\] God's peace and joy are mine.

*^2^ Today I will accept God's peace and joy\
In glad exchange for all the substitutes\
Which I have made for happiness and peace.*

\[106\] Let me be still and listen to the truth.

*^3^ Let mine own feeble voice be still, and let\
Me hear the mighty Voice of truth itself\
Assure me that I am God's perfect Son.*

^4^ On the hour:

*^5^ God's peace and joy are mine.*

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ Let me be still and listen to the truth.*
:::
:::

[]{#part0042_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 119**](#part0004.html#level-387) {#part0042_split_009.html#h1-387 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[107\] Truth will correct all errors in my mind.

*^2^ I am mistaken when I think I can\
Be hurt in any way. I am God's Son,\
Whose Self rests safely in the Mind of God.*

\[108\] To give and to receive are one in truth.

*^3^ I will forgive all things today, that I\
May learn how to accept the truth in me,\
And come to recognize my sinlessness.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ Truth will correct all errors in my mind.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ To give and to receive are one in truth.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 120**](#part0004.html#level-388) {#part0042_split_010.html#h1-388 .level1}

^1^ For morning and evening review:

::: {.pull-quote}
\[109\] I rest in God.

*^2^ I rest in God today and let Him work\
In me and through me, while I rest in Him\
In quiet and in perfect certainty.*

\[110\] I am as God created me.

*^3^ I am God's Son. Today I lay aside\
All sick illusions of myself and let\
My Father tell me Who I really am.*
:::

^4^ On the hour:

::: {.pull-quote}
*^5^ I rest in God.*
:::

^6^ On the half hour:

*^7^ I am as God created me.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 121 Forgiveness is the key to happiness**](#part0004.html#level-389) {#part0042_split_011.html#h1-389 .level1}

^1^ Here is the answer to your search for peace. Here is the key to
meaning in a world which seems to make no sense. Here is the way to
safety in apparent dangers which appear to threaten you at every turn
and bring uncertainty to all your hopes of ever finding quietness and
peace. Here are all questions answered; here the end of all uncertainty
ensured at last.

^2^ The unforgiving mind is full of fear and offers love no room to be
itself, no place where it can spread its wings in peace and soar above
the turmoil of the world. The unforgiving mind is sad, without the hope
of respite and release from pain. It suffers and abides in misery,
peering about in darkness, seeing not, yet certain of the danger lurking
there.

^3^ The unforgiving mind is torn with doubt, confused about itself and
all it sees, afraid and angry, weak and blustering, afraid to go ahead,
afraid to stay, afraid to waken or to go to sleep, afraid of every
sound, yet more afraid of stillness; terrified of darkness, yet more
terrified at the approach of light.

^4^ What can the unforgiving mind perceive but its damnation? What can
it behold except the proof that all its sins are real? The unforgiving
mind sees no mistakes, but only sins. It looks upon the world with
sightless eyes and shrieks as it beholds its own projections rising to
attack its miserable parody of life. It wants to live, yet wishes it
were dead. It wants forgiveness, yet it sees no hope. It wants escape,
yet can conceive of none because it sees the sinful everywhere.

^5^ The unforgiving mind is in despair, without the prospect of a future
which can offer anything but more despair. Yet it regards its judgment
of the world as irreversible and does not see it has condemned itself to
this despair. It thinks it cannot change, for what it sees bears witness
that its judgment is correct. It does not ask because it thinks it
knows. It does not question, certain it is right.

^6^ Forgiveness is acquired. It is not inherent in the mind, which
cannot sin. As sin was an idea you taught yourself, forgiveness must be
learned by you as well, but from a Teacher other than yourself, who
represents the other Self in you. Through Him you learn how to forgive
the self you think you made and let it disappear. Thus you return your
mind as one to Him Who is your Self and Who can never sin.

^7^ Each unforgiving mind presents you with an opportunity to teach your
own how to forgive itself. Each one awaits release from hell through you
and turns to you imploringly for Heaven here and now. It has no hope,
but you become its hope. And as its hope, do you become your own. The
unforgiving mind must learn through your forgiveness that it has been
saved from hell. And as you teach salvation, you will learn.

^8^ Yet all your teaching and your learning will be not of you, but of
the Teacher Who was given you to show the way to you. Today we practice
learning to forgive. If you are willing, you can learn today to take the
key to happiness and use it on your own behalf. We will devote ten
minutes in the morning and at night another ten, to learning how to give
forgiveness and receive forgiveness too.

^9^ The unforgiving mind does not believe that giving and receiving are
the same. Yet we will try to learn today that they are one through
practicing forgiving toward one whom you think of as an enemy and one
whom you consider as a friend. And as you learn to see them both as one,
we will extend the lesson to ourselves and see that their escape
included ours.

^10^ Begin the longer practice periods by thinking of someone you do not
like, who seems to irritate you or to cause regret in you if you should
meet him; one you actively despise or merely try to overlook. It does
not matter what the form your anger takes. You probably have chosen him
already. He will do.

^11^ Now close your eyes and see him in your mind and look at him a
while. Try to perceive some light in him somewhere-a little gleam which
you had never noticed. Try to find some little spark of brightness
shining through the ugly picture which you hold of him. Look at this
picture until you see a light somewhere within it, and then try to let
this light extend until it covers him and makes the picture beautiful
and good.

^12^ Look at this changed perception for a while, and turn your mind to
one you call a friend. Try to transfer the light you learned to see
around your former "enemy" to him. Perceive him now as more than friend
to you, for in that light his holiness shows you your savior, saved and
saving, healed and whole. Then let him offer you the light you see in
him and let your "enemy" and friend unite in blessing you with what you
gave. Now are you one with them and they with you. Now have you been
forgiven by yourself.

^13^ Do not forget throughout the day the role forgiveness plays in
bringing happiness to every unforgiving mind, with yours among them.
Every hour tell yourself:

*^14^ Forgiveness is the key to happiness.\
I will awaken from the dream that I\
Am mortal, fallible, and full of sin,\
And know I am the perfect Son of God.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 122 Forgiveness offers everything I want**](#part0004.html#level-390) {#part0042_split_012.html#h1-390 .level1}

^1^ What could you want forgiveness cannot give? Do you want peace?
Forgiveness offers it. Do you want happiness, a quiet mind, a certainty
of purpose, and a sense of worth and beauty that transcends the world?
Do you want care and safety and the warmth of sure protection always? Do
you want a quietness that cannot be disturbed, a gentleness that never
can be hurt, a deep, abiding comfort, and a rest so perfect it can never
be upset?

^2^ All this forgiveness offers you, and more. It sparkles in your eyes
as you awake and gives you joy with which to meet the day. It soothes
your forehead while you sleep and rests upon your eyelids so you see no
dreams of fear and evil, malice, and attack. And when you wake again, it
offers you another day of happiness and peace. All this forgiveness
offers you, and more.

^3^ Forgiveness lets the veil be lifted up which hides the face of
Christ from those who look with unforgiving eyes upon the world. It lets
you recognize the Son of God and clears your memory of all dead thoughts
so that remembrance of your Father can arise across the threshold of
your mind.

^4^ What would you want forgiveness cannot give? What gifts but these
are worthy to be sought? What fancied value, trivial effect, or
transient promise never to be kept can hold more hope than what
forgiveness brings? Why would you seek an answer other than the answer
that will answer everything? Here is the perfect answer, given to
imperfect questions, meaningless requests, half-hearted willingness to
hear, and less than halfway diligence and partial trust.

^5^ Here is the answer! Seek for it no more. You will not find another
one instead. God's plan for your salvation cannot change, nor can it
fail. Be thankful it remains exactly as He planned it. Changelessly it
stands before you like an open door with warmth and welcome calling from
beyond the doorway, bidding you to enter in and make yourself at home
where you belong.

^6^ Here is the answer! Would you stand outside while all of Heaven
waits for you within? Forgive and be forgiven. As you give, you will
receive. There is no plan but this for the salvation of the Son of God.
Let us today rejoice that this is so, for here we have an answer, clear
and plain, beyond deceit in its simplicity. All the complexities the
world has spun of fragile cobwebs disappear before the power and the
majesty of this extremely simple statement of the truth.

^7^ Here is the answer! Do not turn away in aimless wandering again.
Accept salvation now. It is the gift of God and not the world. The world
can give no gifts of any value to a mind which has received what God has
given as its own. God wills salvation be received today and that the
intricacies of your dreams no longer hide their nothingness from you.

^8^ Open your eyes today, and look upon a happy world of safety and of
peace. Forgiveness is the means by which it comes to take the place of
hell. In quietness it rises up to greet your open eyes and fill your
heart with deep tranquillity as ancient truths, forever newly born,
arise in your awareness. What you will remember then can never be
described. Yet your forgiveness offers it to you.

^9^ Remembering the gifts forgiveness gives, we undertake our practicing
today with hope and faith that this will be the day salvation will be
ours. Earnestly and gladly will we seek for it today, aware we hold the
key within our hands, accepting Heaven's answer to the hell we made, but
where we would remain no more.

^10^ Morning and evening do we gladly give a quarter of an hour to the
search in which the end of hell is guaranteed. Begin in hopefulness, for
we have reached the turning point at which the road becomes far easier.
And now the way is short that yet we travel. We are close indeed to the
appointed ending of the dream.

^11^ Sink into happiness as you begin these practice periods, for they
hold out the sure rewards of questions answered, and what your
acceptance of the answer brings. Today it will be given you to feel the
peace forgiveness offers and the joy the lifting of the veil holds out
to you.

^12^ Before the light you will receive today the world will fade until
it disappears, and you will see another world arise you have no words to
picture. Now we walk directly into light, and we receive the gifts which
have been held in store for us since time began, kept waiting for today.
Forgiveness offers everything you want. Today all things you want are
given you.

^13^ Let not your gifts recede throughout the day, as you return again
to meet a world of shifting change and bleak appearances. Retain your
gifts in clear awareness as you see the changeless in the heart of
change, the light of truth behind appearances. Be tempted not to let
your gifts slip by and drift into forgetfulness but hold them firmly in
your mind by your attempts to think of them at least a minute as each
quarter of an hour passes by.

^14^ Remind yourself how precious are these gifts with this reminder,
which has power to hold your gifts in your awareness through the day:

*^15^ Forgiveness offers everything I want.\
Today I have accepted this as true.\
Today I have received the gifts of God.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 123 I thank my Father for His gifts to me**](#part0004.html#level-391) {#part0042_split_013.html#h1-391 .level1}

^1^ Today let us be thankful. We have come to gentler pathways and to
smoother roads. There is no thought of turning back and no implacable
resistance to the truth. A bit of wavering remains, some small
objections, and a little hesitance, but we can well be grateful for our
gains, which are far greater than we realize.

^2^ A day devoted now to gratitude will add the benefit of some insight
into the real extent of all the gains which you have made; the gifts you
have received. Be glad today in loving thankfulness your Father has not
left you to yourself, nor let you wander in the dark alone. Be grateful
He has saved you from the self you thought you made to take the place of
Him and His creation. Give Him thanks today.

^3^ Give thanks that He has not abandoned you and that His Love forever
will remain shining on you, forever without change. Give thanks as well
that you are changeless, for the Son He loves is changeless as Himself.
Be grateful you are saved. Be glad you have a function in salvation to
fulfill. Be thankful that your value far transcends your meager gifts
and petty judgments of the one whom God established as His Son.

^4^ Today in gratitude we lift our hearts above despair and raise our
thankful eyes, no longer looking downward to the dust. We sing the song
of thankfulness today in honor of the Self Which God has willed to be
our true identity in Him. Today we smile on everyone we see and walk
with lightened footsteps as we go to do what is appointed us to do. We
do not go alone. And we give thanks that in our solitude a Friend has
come to speak the saving Word of God to us.

^5^ And thanks to you for listening to Him. His Word is soundless if it
be not heard. In thanking Him the thanks are yours as well. An unheard
message will not save the world, however mighty be the Voice that
speaks, however loving may the message be. Thanks be to you who heard,
for you become the messenger who brings His Voice with you and let it
echo round and round the world.

^6^ Receive the thanks of God today, as you give thanks to Him. For He
would offer you the thanks you give, since He receives your gifts in
loving gratitude and gives them back a thousand and a hundred thousand
more than they were given. He will bless your gifts by sharing them with
you, and so they grow in power and in strength until they fill the world
with gladness and with gratitude.

^7^ Receive His thanks and offer yours to Him for 15 minutes twice
today. And you will realize to Whom you offer thanks, and Whom He thanks
as you are thanking Him. This holy half an hour given Him will be
returned to you in terms of years for every second, power to save the
world eons more quickly for your thanks to Him.

^8^ Receive His thanks, and you will understand how lovingly He holds
you in His Mind, how deep and limitless His care for you, how perfect is
His gratitude to you. Remember hourly to think of Him and give Him
thanks for everything you gave His Son that he might rise above the
world remembering his Father and his Self.
:::

[]{#part0042_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 124 Let me remember I am one with God**](#part0004.html#level-392) {#part0042_split_014.html#h1-392 .level1}

^1^ Today we will again give thanks for our identity in God. Our home is
safe, protection guaranteed in all we do, power and strength available
to us in all our undertakings. We can fail in nothing. Everything we
touch takes on a shining light which blesses and which heals. At one
with God and with the universe, we go our way rejoicing, with the
thought that God Himself goes everywhere with us.

^2^ How holy are our minds! And everything we see reflects the holiness
within the mind at one with God and with itself. How easily do errors
disappear, and death give place to everlasting life. Our shining
footprints point the way to truth, for God is our Companion as we walk
the world a little while. And those who come to follow us will recognize
the way because the light we carry stays behind, yet still remains with
us as we walk on.

^3^ What we receive is our eternal gift to those who follow after and to
those who went before or stayed with us a while. And God, Who loves us
with the equal love in which we were created, smiles on us and offers us
the happiness we gave. Today we will not doubt His Love for us nor
question His protection and His care.

^4^ No meaningless anxieties can come between our faith and our
awareness of His Presence. We are one with Him today in recognition and
remembrance. We feel Him in our hearts. Our minds contain His Thoughts;
our eyes behold His loveliness in all we look upon. Today we see only
the loving and the lovable.

^5^ We see it in appearances of pain, and pain gives way to peace. We
see it in the frantic, in the sad and the distressed, the lonely and
afraid, who are restored to the tranquillity and peace of mind in which
they were created. And we see it in the dying and the dead as well,
restoring them to life. All this we see because we saw it first within
ourselves.

^6^ No miracle can ever be denied to those who know that they are one
with God. No thought of theirs but has the power to heal all forms of
suffering in anyone in times gone by and times as yet to come as easily
as in the ones who walk beside them now. Their thoughts are timeless and
apart from distance as apart from time.

^7^ We join in this awareness as we say that we are one with God. For in
these words we say as well that we are saved and healed, that we can
save and heal accordingly. We have accepted and we now would give, for
we would keep the gifts our Father gave. Today we would experience
ourselves at one with Him, so that the world may share our recognition
of reality. In our experience the world is freed; as we deny our
separation from our Father, it is healed along with us.

^8^ Peace be to you today. Secure your peace by practicing awareness you
are one with your Creator, as He is with you. Sometime today, whenever
it seems best, devote a half an hour to the thought that you are one
with God. This is our first attempt at an extended period for which we
give no rules nor special words to guide your meditation. We will trust
God's Voice to speak as He sees fit today, certain He will not fail.
Abide with Him this half an hour. He will do the rest.

^9^ Your benefit will not be less if you believe that nothing happens.
You may not be ready to accept the gain today. Yet sometime, somewhere,
it will come to you, nor will you fail to recognize it when it dawns
with certainty upon your mind. This half an hour will be framed in gold,
with every minute like a diamond set around the mirror that this
exercise will offer you. And you will see Christ's face upon it, in
reflection of your own.

^10^ Perhaps today, perhaps tomorrow, you will see your own
transfiguration in the glass this holy half an hour will hold out to you
to look upon yourself. When you are ready, you will find it there within
your mind and waiting to be found. You will remember then the thought to
which you gave this half an hour, thankfully aware no time was ever
better spent.

^11^ Perhaps today, perhaps tomorrow, you will look into this glass and
understand the sinless light you see belongs to you, the loveliness you
look on is your own. Count this half hour as your gift to God, in
certainty that His return will be a sense of love you cannot understand,
a joy too deep for you to comprehend, a sight too holy for the body's
eyes to see, and yet you can be sure someday, perhaps today, perhaps
tomorrow, you will understand and comprehend and see.

^12^ Add further jewels to the golden frame that holds the mirror
offered you today by hourly repeating to yourself:

*^13^ Let me remember I am one with God,\
At one with all my brothers and mySelf,\
In everlasting holiness and peace.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 125 In quiet I receive God's Word today**](#part0004.html#level-393) {#part0042_split_015.html#h1-393 .level1}

^1^ Let this day be a day of stillness and of quiet listening. Your
Father wills you hear His Word today. He calls to you from deep within
your mind where He abides. Hear Him today. No peace is possible until
His Word is heard around the world; until your mind, in quiet listening,
accepts the message which the world must hear to usher in the quiet time
of peace.

^2^ This world will change through you. No other means can save it, for
God's plan is simply this: the Son of God is free to save himself, given
the Word of God to be his Guide, forever in his mind and at his side to
lead him surely to his Father's house by his own will, forever free as
God's. He is not led by force, but only love. He is not judged, but only
sanctified.

^3^ In stillness we will hear God's Voice today without intrusion of our
petty thoughts, without our personal desires, and without all judgment
of His holy Word. We will not judge ourselves today, for what we are
cannot be judged. We stand apart from all the judgments which the world
has laid upon the Son of God. It knows him not. Today we will not listen
to the world, but wait in silence for the Word of God.

^4^ Hear, holy Son of God, your Father speak. His Voice would give to
you His holy Word to spread across the world the tidings of salvation
and the holy time of peace. We gather at the throne of God today, the
quiet place within your mind where He abides forever in the holiness
which He created and will never leave.

^5^ He has not waited until you return your mind to Him to give His Word
to you. He has not hid Himself from you while you have wandered off a
little while from Him. He does not cherish the illusions which you hold
about yourself. He knows His Son and wills that he remain as part of Him
regardless of his dreams, regardless of his madness that his will is not
his own.

^6^ Today He speaks to you. His Voice awaits your silence, for His Word
cannot be heard until your mind is quiet for a while and meaningless
desires have been stilled. Await His Word in quiet. There is peace
within you to be called upon today to help make ready your most holy
mind to hear the Voice of its Creator speak.

^7^ Three times today, at times most suitable for silence, give ten
minutes set apart from listening to the world and choose instead a
gentle listening to the Word of God. He speaks from nearer than your
heart to you. His Voice is closer than your hand. His Love is everything
you are and that He is; the same as you, and you the same as He.

^8^ It is your voice to which you listen as He speaks to you. It is your
Word He speaks. It is the Word of freedom and of peace, of unity of will
and purpose, with no separation nor division in the single Mind of
Father and of Son. In quiet listen to your Self today, and let Him tell
you God has never left His Son, and you have never left your Self.

^9^ Only be quiet. You will need no rule but this to let your practicing
today lift you above the thinking of the world and free your vision from
the body's eyes. Only be still and listen. You will hear the Word in
which the Will of God the Son joins in His Father's Will, at one with
It, with no illusions interposed between the wholly indivisible and
true.

^10^ As every hour passes by today, be still a moment and remind
yourself you have a special purpose for this day-in quiet to receive the
Word of God.
:::

[]{#part0042_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 126 All that I give is given to myself**](#part0004.html#level-394) {#part0042_split_016.html#h1-394 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea, completely alien to the ego and the thinking of the
world, is crucial to the thought reversal which this course will bring
about. If you believed this statement, there would be no problem in
complete forgiveness, certainty of goal, and sure direction. You would
understand the means by which salvation comes to you and would not
hesitate to use it now.

^2^ Let us consider what you do believe in place of this idea. It seems
to you that other people are apart from you and able to behave in ways
which have no bearing on your thoughts, nor theirs on yours. Therefore
your attitudes have no effect on them, and their appeals for help are
not in any way related to your own. You further think that they can sin
without affecting your perception of yourself, while you can judge their
sin and yet remain apart from condemnation and at peace.

^3^ When you "forgive" a sin there is no gain to you directly. You give
charity to one unworthy merely to point out that you are better, on a
higher plane than he whom you forgive. He has not earned your charitable
tolerance, which you bestow on one unworthy of the gift because his sins
have lowered him beneath a true equality with you. He has no claim on
your forgiveness. It holds out a gift to him but hardly to yourself.

^4^ Thus is forgiveness basically unsound-a charitable whim, benevolent
yet undeserved; a gift bestowed at times, at other times withheld.
Unmerited, withholding it is just, nor is it fair that you should suffer
when it is withheld. The sin which you forgive is not your own. Someone
apart from you committed it. And if you then are gracious unto him by
giving him what he does not deserve, your gift is no more yours than was
his sin.

^5^ If this be true, forgiveness has no grounds on which to rest
dependably and sure. It is an eccentricity in which you sometimes choose
to give indulgently an undeserved reprieve. Yet it remains your right to
let the sinner not escape the justified repayment for his sin. Think you
the Lord of Heaven would allow the world's salvation to depend on this?
Would not His care for you be small indeed if your salvation rested on a
whim?

^6^ You do not understand forgiveness. As you see it, it is but a check
upon overt attack, without requiring correction in your mind. It cannot
give you peace as you perceive it. It is not a means for your release
from what you see in someone other than yourself. It has no power to
restore your unity with him to your awareness. It is not what God
intended it to be for you.

^7^ Not having given Him the gift He asks of you, you cannot recognize
His gifts and think He has not given them to you. Yet would He ask you
for a gift unless it was for you? Could He be satisfied with empty
gestures and evaluate such petty gifts as worthy of His Son? Salvation
is a better gift than this, and true forgiveness, as the means by which
it is attained, must heal the mind that gives, for giving is receiving.
What remains as unreceived has not been given, but what has been given
must have been received.

^8^ Today we try to understand the truth that giver and receiver are the
same. You will need help to make this meaningful because it is so alien
to the thoughts to which you are accustomed. But the Help you need is
there. Give Him your faith today and ask Him that He share your
practicing in truth today. And if you only catch a tiny glimpse of the
release which lies in the idea we practice for today, this is a day of
glory for the world.

^9^ Give 15 minutes twice today to the attempt to understand today's
idea. It is the thought by which forgiveness takes its proper place in
your priorities. It is the thought that will release your mind from
every bar to what forgiveness means and let you realize its worth to
you.

^10^ In silence close your eyes upon the world which does not understand
forgiveness and seek sanctuary in the quiet place where thoughts are
changed and false beliefs laid by. Repeat today's idea, and ask for help
in understanding what it really means. Be willing to be taught. Be glad
to hear the Voice of truth and healing speak to you, and you will
understand the words He speaks and recognize He speaks your words to
you.

^11^ As often as you can, remind yourself you have a goal today-an aim
which makes this day of special value to yourself and all your brothers.
Do not let your mind forget this goal for long, but tell yourself:

*^12^ All that I give is given to myself.\
The Help I need to learn that this is true\
Is with me now. And I will trust in Him.*

^13^ Then spend a quiet moment, opening your mind to His correction and
His Love. And what you hear of Him you will believe, for what He gives
will be received by you.
:::

[]{#part0042_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 127 There is no love but God's**](#part0004.html#level-395) {#part0042_split_017.html#h1-395 .level1}

^1^ Perhaps you think that different kinds of love are possible. Perhaps
you think there is a kind of love for this, a kind for that; a way of
loving one, another way of loving still another. Love is one. It has no
separate parts and no degrees; no kinds nor levels, no divergencies and
no distinctions. It is like itself, unchanged throughout. It never
alters with a person or a circumstance. It is the heart of God, and also
of His Son.

^2^ Love's meaning is obscure to anyone who thinks that love can change.
He does not see that changing love must be impossible. And thus he
thinks that he can love at times and hate at other times. He also thinks
that love can be bestowed on one and yet remain itself although it is
withheld from others. To believe these things of love is not to
understand it. If it could make such distinctions it would have to judge
between the righteous and the sinner and perceive the Son of God in
separate parts.

^3^ Love cannot judge. As it is one itself, it looks on all as one. Its
meaning lies in oneness. And it must elude the mind that thinks of it as
partial or in part. There is no love but God's, and all of love is His.
There is no principle which rules where love is not. Love is a law
without an opposite. Its wholeness is the power holding everything as
one, the link between the Father and the Son which holds them both
forever as the same.

^4^ No course whose purpose is to teach you what you really are could
fail to emphasize there is no difference in what you are and what love
is. Love's meaning is your own, and shared by God Himself. For what you
are is what He is. There is no love but His, and what He is is
everything there is. There is no limit placed upon Himself, and so are
you unlimited as well.

^5^ No laws the world obeys can help you grasp love's meaning. What the
world believes was made to hide love's meaning and to keep it dark and
secret. There is not one principle the world upholds but violates the
truth of what love is and what you are as well. Seek not within the
world to find your Self. Love is not found in darkness and in death. Yet
it is perfectly apparent to eyes that see and ears that hear its Voice.

^6^ Today we practice making free our mind of all the laws you think you
must obey, of all the limits under which you live, and all the changes
which you think are part of human destiny. Today we take the largest
single step this course requests in your advance toward its established
goal. If you achieve the faintest glimmering of what love means today,
you have advanced in distance without measure and in time beyond the
count of years to your release.

^7^ Let us together, then, be glad to give some time to God today and
understand there is no better use for time than this. For 15 minutes
twice today escape from every law in which you now believe. Open your
mind and rest. The world that seems to hold you prisoner can be escaped
by anyone who does not hold it dear. Withdraw all value you have placed
upon its meager offerings and senseless gifts, and let the Gift of God
replace them all.

^8^ Call to your Father, certain that His Voice will answer. He Himself
has promised this. And He Himself will place a spark of truth within
your mind wherever you give up a false belief, a dark illusion of your
own reality and what love means. He will shine through your idle
thoughts today and help you understand the truth of love. In loving
gentleness, He will abide with you as you allow His Voice to teach
love's meaning to your clean and open mind. And He will bless the Lesson
with His Love.

^9^ Today the legion of the future years of waiting for salvation
disappears before the timelessness of what you learn. Let us give thanks
today that we are spared a future like the past. Today we leave the past
behind us, never more to be remembered. And we raise our eyes upon a
different present, where a future shines unlike the past in every
attribute.

^10^ The world in infancy is newly born. And we will watch it grow in
strength and health to shed its blessing upon all who come to learn to
cast aside the world they thought was made in hate to be love's enemy.
Now are they all made free along with us. Now are they all our brothers
in God's Love.

^11^ We will remember them throughout the day because we cannot leave a
part of us outside our love if we would know our Self. At least three
times an hour think of one who makes the journey with you and who came
to learn what you must learn. And as he comes to mind, give him this
message from your Self:

*^12^ I bless you, brother, with the Love of God\
Which I would share with you. For I would learn\
The joyous lesson that there is no love\
But God's and yours and mine and everyone's.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 128 The world I see has nothing that I want**](#part0004.html#level-396) {#part0042_split_018.html#h1-396 .level1}

^1^ The world you see has nothing that you need to offer you, nothing
that you can use in any way, nor anything at all that serves to give you
joy. Believe this thought, and you are saved from years of misery, from
countless disappointments, and from hopes that turn to bitter ashes of
despair. No one but must accept this thought as true, if he would leave
this world behind and soar beyond its petty scope and little ways.

^2^ Each thing you value here is but a chain that binds you to the
world, and it will serve no other end but this. For everything must
serve the purpose you have given it until you see a different purpose
there. The only purpose worthy of your mind this world contains is that
you pass it by, without delaying to perceive some hope where there is
none. Be you deceived no more. The world you see has nothing that you
want.

^3^ Escape today the chains you place upon your mind when you perceive
salvation here. For what you value you make part of you as you perceive
yourself. All things you seek to make your value greater in your sight
limit you further, hide your worth from you, and add another bar across
the door that leads to true awareness of your Self.

^4^ Let nothing which relates to body thoughts delay your progress to
salvation, nor permit temptation to believe the world has anything you
want to hold you back. Nothing is here to cherish. Nothing here is worth
one instant of delay and pain, one moment of uncertainty and doubt. The
worthless offer nothing. Certainty of worth cannot be found in
worthlessness.

^5^ Today we practice letting go all thought of values we have given to
the world. We leave it free of purposes we gave its aspects and its
phases and its dreams. We hold it purposeless within our minds and
loosen it from all we wish it were. Thus do we lift the chains which bar
the door to freedom from the world and go beyond all little values and
diminished goals.

^6^ Peace and be still a little while, and see how far you rise above
the world when you release your mind from chains and let it seek the
level where it finds itself at home. It will be grateful to be free a
while. It knows where it belongs. But free its wings, and it will fly in
sureness and in joy to join its holy purpose. Let it rest in its
Creator, there to be restored to sanity, to freedom, and to love.

^7^ Give it ten minutes rest three times today. And when your eyes are
opened afterwards, you will not value anything you see as much as when
you looked at it before. Your whole perspective on the world will shift
by just a little every time you let your mind escape its chains. The
world is not where it belongs. And you belong where it would be and
where it goes to rest when you release it from the world. Your Guide is
sure. Open your mind to Him. Be still and rest.

^8^ Protect your mind throughout the day as well. And when you think you
see some value in an aspect or an image of the world, refuse to lay this
chain upon your mind and tell yourself with quiet certainty:

*^9^ This will not tempt me to delay myself.\
The world I see has nothing that I want.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 129 Beyond this world there is a world I want**](#part0004.html#level-397) {#part0042_split_019.html#h1-397 .level1}

^1^ This is the thought which follows from the one we practiced
yesterday. You cannot stop with the idea the world is worthless, for
unless you see that there is something else to hope for, you will only
be depressed. Our emphasis is not on giving up the world but on
exchanging it for what is far more satisfying, filled with joy, and
capable of offering you peace. Think you this world can offer that to
you?

^2^ It might be worth a little time to think once more about the value
of this world. Perhaps you will concede there is no loss in letting go
all thought of value here. The world you see is merciless indeed,
unstable, cruel, unconcerned with you, quick to avenge, and pitiless
with hate. It gives but to rescind and takes away all things that you
have cherished for a while. No lasting love is found, for none is here.
This is the world of time, where all things end.

^3^ Is it a loss to find a world instead where losing is impossible,
where love endures forever, hate cannot exist, and vengeance has no
meaning? Is it loss to find all things you really want and know they
have no ending, and they will remain exactly as you want them throughout
time?

^4^ Yet even they will be exchanged at last for what we cannot speak of,
for you go from there to where words fail entirely, into a silence where
the language is unspoken and yet surely understood. Communication,
unambiguous and plain as day, remains unlimited for all eternity. And
God Himself speaks to His Son as His Son speaks to Him. Their language
has no words, for what they say cannot be symbolized. Their knowledge is
direct and wholly shared and wholly one.

^5^ How far away from this are you who stay bound to this world. And yet
how near are you when you exchange it for the world you want. Now is the
last step certain; now you stand an instant's space away from
timelessness. Here can you but look forward, never back to see again the
world you do not want. Here is the world that comes to take its place as
you unbind your mind from little things the world sets forth to keep you
prisoner there. Value them not, and they will disappear. Esteem them,
and they will seem real to you.

^6^ Such is the choice. What loss can be for you in choosing not to
value nothingness? This world holds nothing that you really want, but
what you choose instead you want indeed! Let it be given you today. It
waits but for your choosing it to take the place of all the things you
seek but do not want.

^7^ Practice your willingness to make this change ten minutes in the
morning and at night and once more in between. Begin with this:

*^8^ Beyond this world there is a world I want.\
I choose to see that world instead of this,\
For here is nothing that I really want.*

^9^ Then close your eyes upon the world you see, and in the silent
darkness watch the lights that are not of this world light one by one
until where one begins, another ends, losing all meaning as they blend
in one.

^10^ Today the lights of Heaven bend to you, to shine upon your eyelids
as you rest beyond the world of darkness. Here is light your eyes cannot
behold. And yet your mind can see it plainly and can understand. A day
of grace is given you today, and we give thanks. This day we realize
that what you feared to lose was only loss.

^11^ Now do we understand there is no loss, for we have seen its
opposite at last, and we are grateful that the choice is made. Remember
your decision hourly, and take a moment to confirm your choice by laying
by whatever thoughts you have, and dwelling briefly only upon this:

*^12^ The world I see has nothing that I want.\
Beyond this world there is a world I want.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 130 It is impossible to see two worlds**](#part0004.html#level-398) {#part0042_split_020.html#h1-398 .level1}

^1^ Perception is consistent. What you see reflects your thinking. And
your thinking but reflects your choice of what you want to see. Your
values are determiners of this, for what you value you must want to see,
believing what you see is really there. No one can see a world his mind
has not accorded value. And no one can fail to look upon what he
believes he wants.

^2^ Yet who can really hate and love at once? Who can desire what he
does not want to have reality? And who can choose to see a world of
which he is afraid? Fear must make blind, for this its weapon is-that
which you fear to see you cannot see. Love and perception thus go hand
in hand, but fear obscures in darkness what is there.

^3^ What, then, can fear project upon the world? What can be seen in
darkness that is real? Truth is eclipsed by fear, and what remains is
but imagined. Yet what can be real in blind imaginings of panic borne?
What would you want that this is shown to you? What would you wish to
keep in such a dream?

^4^ Fear has made everything you think you see. All separation, all
distinctions, and the multitude of differences you believe make up the
world. They are not there. Love's enemy has made them up. Yet love can
have no enemy, and so they have no cause, no being, and no consequence.
They can be valued but remain unreal. They can be sought, but they can
not be found.

^5^ Today we will not seek for them nor waste this day in seeking not
what can be found. It is impossible to see two worlds which have no
overlap of any kind. Seek for the one; the other disappears. But one
remains. They are the range of choice beyond which your decision cannot
go. The real and the unreal are all there is to choose between, and
nothing more than these.

^6^ Today we will attempt no compromise where none is possible. The
world you see is proof you have already made a choice as all-embracing
as its opposite. What we would learn today is more than just the Lesson
that you cannot see two worlds. It also teaches that the one you see is
quite consistent from the point of view from which you see it. It is all
a piece because it stems from one emotion, and reflects its source in
everything you see.

^7^ Six times today in thanks and gratitude we gladly give five minutes
to the thought which ends all compromise and doubt and go beyond them
all as one. We will not make a thousand meaningless distinctions, nor
attempt to bring with us a little part of unreality as we devote our
minds to finding only what is real.

^8^ Begin your searching for the other world by asking for a strength
beyond your own, and recognize what it is you seek. You do not want
illusions. And you come to these five minutes emptying your hands of all
the petty treasures of this world. You wait for God to help you as you
say:

*^9^ It is impossible to see two worlds.\
Let me accept the strength God offers me\
And see no value in this world that I\
May find my freedom and deliverance.*

^10^ God will be there. For you have called upon the great unfailing
Power Who will take this giant step with you in gratitude. Nor will you
fail to see His thanks expressed in tangible perception and in truth.
You will not doubt what you will look upon. For though it is perception,
it is not the kind of seeing that your eyes alone have ever seen before.
And you will know God's strength upheld as you made this choice.

^11^ Dismiss temptation easily today whenever it arises merely by
remembering the limits on your choice. The unreal or the real, the false
or true is what you see, and only what you see. Perception is consistent
with your choice, and hell or Heaven comes to you as one.

^12^ Accept a little part of hell as real, and you have damned your eyes
and cursed your sight, and what you will behold is hell indeed. Yet the
release of Heaven still remains within your range of choice to take the
place of everything that hell would show to you. All you need say to any
part of hell, whatever form it takes, is simply this:

*^13^ It is impossible to see two worlds.\
I seek my freedom and deliverance,\
And this is not a part of what I want.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 131 No one can fail who asks to reach the truth**](#part0004.html#level-399) {#part0042_split_021.html#h1-399 .level1}

^1^ Failure is all about you while you seek for goals that cannot be
achieved. You look for permanence in the impermanent, for love where
there is none, for safety in the midst of danger, immortality within the
darkness of the dream of death. Who could succeed where contradiction is
the setting of his searching and the place to which he comes to find
stability?

^2^ Goals which are meaningless are not attained. There is no way to
reach them, for the means by which you strive for them are meaningless
as they are. Who can use such senseless means and hope through them to
gain in anything? Where can they lead? And what could they achieve that
offers any hope of being real?

^3^ Pursuit of the imagined leads to death because it is the search for
nothingness, and while you seek for life you ask for death. You look for
safety and security while in your heart you pray for danger and
protection for the little dream you made.

^4^ Yet searching is inevitable here. For this you came, and you will
surely do the thing you came for. But the world can not dictate the goal
for which you search unless you give it power to do so. Otherwise, you
still are free to choose a goal that lies beyond the world and every
worldly thought and one which comes to you from an idea relinquished yet
remembered, old yet new-an echo of a heritage forgot, yet holding
everything you really want.

^5^ Be glad that search you must. Be glad as well to learn you search
for Heaven and must find the goal you really want. No one can fail to
want this goal and reach it in the end. God's Son cannot seek vainly,
though he try to force delay, deceive himself, and think that it is hell
he seeks. When he is wrong, he finds correction; when he wanders off, he
is led back to his appointed task.

^6^ No one remains in hell, for no one can abandon his Creator nor
affect His perfect, timeless, and unchanging Love. You will find Heaven.
Everything you seek but this will fall away, yet not because it has been
taken from you. It will go because you do not want it. You will reach
the goal you really want as certainly as God created you in sinlessness.

^7^ Why wait for Heaven? It is here today. Time is the great illusion it
is past or in the future. Yet this cannot be if it is where God wills
His Son to be. How could the Will of God be in the past or yet to
happen? What He wills is now, without a past and wholly futureless. It
is as far removed from time as is a tiny candle from a distant star, or
what you chose from what you really want.

^8^ Heaven remains your one alternative to this strange world you made
and all its ways-its shifting patterns and uncertain goals, its painful
pleasures, and its tragic joys. God made no contradictions. What denies
its own existence and attacks itself is not of Him. He did not make two
minds, with Heaven as the glad effect of one and earth the other's sorry
outcome that is Heaven's opposite in every way.

^9^ God does not suffer conflict. Nor is His creation split in two. How
could it be His Son could be in hell when God Himself established him in
Heaven? Could he lose what the Eternal Will has given him to be his home
forever? Let us not try longer to impose an alien will upon His single
purpose. He is here because He wills to be, and what He wills is present
now beyond the reach of time.

^10^ Today we will not choose a paradox in place of truth. How could the
Son of God make time to take away the Will of God? He thus denies
himself and contradicts what has no opposite. He thinks he made a hell
opposing Heaven and believes that he abides in what does not exist,
while Heaven is the place he cannot find. Leave foolish thoughts like
these behind today, and turn your mind to true ideas instead.

^11^ No one can fail who asks to reach the truth, and it is truth we ask
to reach today. We will devote ten minutes to this goal three times
today, and we will ask to see the rising of the real world to replace
the foolish images that we held dear, with true ideas arising in the
place of thoughts which have no meaning, no effect, and neither source
nor substance in the truth.

^12^ This we acknowledge as we start upon our practice periods. Begin
with this:

*^13^ I ask to see a different world and think\
A different kind of thought from those I made.\
The world I seek I did not make alone,\
The thoughts I want to think are not my own.*

^14^ For several minutes watch your mind and see, although your eyes are
closed, the senseless world you think is real. Review the thoughts as
well which are compatible with such a world and which you think are
true. Then let them go, and sink below them to the holy place where they
can enter not. There is a door beneath them in your mind which you could
not completely lock to hide what lies beyond.

^15^ Seek for that door and find it. But before you try to open it,
remind yourself no one can fail who asks to reach the truth, and it is
this request you make today. Nothing but this has any meaning now; no
other goal is valued now nor sought; nothing before this door you really
want, and only what lies past it do you seek.

^16^ Put out your hand and see how easily the door swings open with your
one intent to go beyond it. Angels light the way, so that all darkness
vanishes and you are standing in a light so bright and clear that you
can understand all things you see. A tiny moment of surprise, perhaps,
will make you pause before you realize the world you see before you in
the light reflects the truth you knew and did not quite forget in
wandering away in dreams.

^17^ You cannot fail today. There walks with you the Spirit Heaven sent
you that you might approach this door some day and through His aid slip
effortlessly past it to the light. Today that day has come. Today God
keeps His ancient promise to His holy Son, as does His Son remember his
to Him. This is a day of gladness, for we come to the appointed time and
place where you will find the goal of all your searching here and all
the seeking of the world, which ends together as you pass beyond the
door.

^18^ Remember often that today should be a time of special gladness, and
refrain from dismal thoughts and meaningless laments. Salvation's time
has come. Today is set by Heaven Itself to be a time of grace for you
and for the world. If you forget this happy fact, remind yourself with
this:

*^19^ Today I seek and find all that I want.\
My single purpose offers it to me.\
No one can fail who asks to reach the truth.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 132 I loosen the world from all I thought it was**](#part0004.html#level-400) {#part0042_split_022.html#h1-400 .level1}

^1^ What keeps the world in chains but your beliefs? And what can save
the world except your Self? Belief is powerful indeed. The thoughts you
hold are mighty, and illusions are as strong in their effects as is the
truth. A madman thinks the world he sees is real and does not doubt it.
Nor can he be swayed by questioning his thoughts' effects. It is but
when their source is raised to question that the hope of freedom comes
to him at last.

^2^ Yet is salvation easily achieved, for anyone is free to change his
mind, and all his thoughts change with it. Now the source of thought has
shifted, for to change your mind means you have changed the source of
all ideas you think or ever thought or yet will think.

^3^ You free the past from what you thought before. You free the future
from all ancient thoughts of seeking what you do not want to find. The
present now remains the only time. Here in the present is the world set
free. For as you let the past be lifted and release the future from your
ancient fears, you find escape and give it to the world.

^4^ You have enslaved the world with all your fears, with doubts and
miseries, your pain and tears, and all your sorrows press upon it and
keep it a prisoner to your beliefs. Death strikes it everywhere because
you hold the bitter thought of death within your mind. The world is
nothing in itself. Your mind must give it meaning. And what you behold
upon it are your wishes, acted out so you can look on them and think
them real.

^5^ Perhaps you think you did not make the world but came unwillingly to
what was made already, hardly waiting for your thoughts to give it
meaning. Yet in truth you found exactly what you looked for when you
came. There is no world apart from what you wish, and herein lies your
ultimate release. Change but your mind on what you want to see, and all
the world must change accordingly.

^6^ Ideas leave not their source. This central theme is often stated in
the text and must be borne in mind if you would understand the Lesson
for today. It is not pride which tells you that you made the world you
see and that it changes as you change your mind. But it is pride that
argues you have come into a world quite separate from yourself,
impervious to what you think, and quite apart from what you chance to
think it is.

^7^ There is no world! This is the central thought the course attempts
to teach. Not everyone is ready to accept it, and each one must go as
far as he can let himself be led along the road to truth. He will return
and go still farther, or perhaps step back a while and then return
again.

^8^ But healing is the gift of those who are prepared to learn there is
no world and can accept the Lesson now. Their readiness will bring the
Lesson to them in some form which they can understand and recognize.
Some see it suddenly on point of death and rise to teach it. Others find
it in experience that is not of this world, which shows them that the
world does not exist because what they behold must be the truth, and yet
it clearly contradicts the world. And some will find it in this course
and in the exercises that we do today.

^9^ Today's idea is true because the world does not exist. And if it is
indeed your own imagining, then you can loose it from all things you
ever thought it was by merely changing all the thoughts that gave it
these appearances. The sick are healed as you let go all thoughts of
sickness, and the dead arise when you let thoughts of life replace all
thoughts you ever held of death.

^10^ A lesson earlier repeated once must now be stressed again, for it
contains the firm foundation for today's idea. You are as God created
you. There is no place where you can suffer and no time that can bring
change to your eternal state. How can a world of time and place exist if
you remain as God created you?

^11^ What is the lesson for today except another way of saying that to
know your Self is the salvation of the world? To free the world from
every kind of pain is but to change your mind about yourself. There is
no world apart from your ideas because ideas leave not their source, and
you maintain the world within your mind in thought.

^12^ Yet if you are as God created you, you cannot think apart from Him
nor make what does not share His timelessness and love. Are these
inherent in the world you see? Does it create like Him? Unless it does,
it is not real and cannot be at all. If you are real, the world you see
is false, for God's creation is unlike the world in every way. And as it
was His Thought by which you were created, so it is your thoughts which
made it and must set it free that you may know the Thoughts you share
with God.

^13^ Release the world! Your real creations wait for this release to
give you fatherhood, not of illusions, but as God in truth. God shares
His Fatherhood with you who are His Son, for He makes no distinctions in
what is Himself and what is still Himself. What He creates is not apart
from Him, and nowhere does the Father end, the Son begin as something
separate from Him.

^14^ There is no world because it is a thought apart from God and made
to separate the Father and the Son and break away a part of God Himself
and thus destroy His wholeness. Can a world which comes from this idea
be real? Can it be anywhere? Deny illusions, but accept the truth. Deny
you are a shadow briefly laid upon a dying world. Release your mind, and
you will look upon a world released.

^15^ Today our purpose is to free the world from all the idle thoughts
we ever held about it and about all living things we see upon it. They
can not be there-no more than we. For we are in the home our Father set
for us along with them. And we who are as He created us would loose the
world this day from every one of our illusions that we may be free.

^16^ Begin the 15 minute periods in which we practice twice today with
this:

*^17^ I who remain as God created me\
Would loose the world from all I thought it was.\
For I am real because the world is not,\
And I would know my own reality.*

^18^ Then merely rest, alert but with no strain, and let your mind in
quietness be changed so that the world is freed along with you.

^19^ You need not realize that healing comes to many brothers far across
the world as well as to the ones you see near by as you send out these
thoughts to bless the world. But you will sense your own release,
although you may not fully understand as yet that you could never be
released alone.

^20^ Throughout the day, increase the freedom sent through your ideas to
all the world, and say whenever you are tempted to deny the power of
your simple change of mind:

*^21^ I loose the world from all I thought it was\
And choose my own reality instead.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 133 I will not value what is valueless**](#part0004.html#level-402) {#part0042_split_023.html#h1-402 .level1}

^1^ Sometimes in teaching there is benefit, particularly after you have
gone through what seems theoretical and quite remote from what the
student has already learned, to bring him back to practical concerns.
This we will do today. We will not speak of lofty, world-encompassing
ideas but dwell instead on benefits to you.

^2^ You do not ask too much of life, but far too little. When you let
your mind be drawn to bodily concerns, to things you buy, to eminence as
valued by the world, you ask for sorrow, not for happiness. This course
does not attempt to take from you the little that you have. It does not
try to substitute utopian ideas for satisfactions which the world
contains.

^3^ There are no satisfactions in the world. Today we list the real
criteria by which to test all things you think you want. Unless they
meet these sound requirements, they are not worth desiring at all, for
they can but replace what offers more.

^4^ The laws which govern choice you cannot make, no more than you can
make alternatives from which to choose. The choosing you can do; indeed
you must. But it is wise to learn the laws you set in motion when you
choose and what alternatives you choose between. We have already
stressed there are but two, however many there appear to be.

^5^ The range is set, and this we cannot change. It would be most
ungenerous to you to let alternatives be limitless and thus delay your
final choice until you had considered all of them in time and not been
brought so clearly to the place where there is but one choice that must
be made.

^6^ Another kindly and related law is that there is no compromise in
what your choice must bring. It cannot give you just a little, for there
is no in-between. Each choice you make brings everything to you or
nothing. Therefore, if you learn the tests by which you can distinguish
everything from nothing, you will make the better choice.

^7^ First, if you choose a thing that will not last forever, what you
chose is valueless. A temporary value is without all value. Time can
never take away a value that is real. What fades and dies was never
there and makes no offering to him who chooses it. He is deceived by
nothing in a form he thinks he likes.

^8^ Next, if you choose to take a thing away from someone else, you will
have nothing left. This is because when you deny his right to
everything, you have denied your own. You therefore will not recognize
the things you really have, denying they are there. Who seeks to take
away has been deceived by the illusion loss can offer gain. Yet loss
must offer loss and nothing more.

^9^ Your next consideration is the one on which the others rest. Why is
the choice you make of value to you? What attracts your mind to it? What
purpose does it serve? Here it is easiest of all to be deceived, for
what the ego wants it fails to recognize. It does not even tell the
truth as it perceives it, for it needs to keep the halo which it uses to
protect its goals from tarnish and from rust that you may see how
innocent it is.

^10^ Yet is its camouflage a thin veneer which could deceive but those
who are content to be deceived. Its goals are obvious to anyone who
cares to look for them. Here is deception doubled, for the one who is
deceived will not perceive that he has merely failed to gain. He will
believe that he has served the ego's hidden goals. And though he tries
to keep its halo clear within his vision, yet must he perceive its
tarnished edges and its rusted core.

^11^ His ineffectual mistakes appear as sins to him because he looks
upon the tarnished as his own-the rust a sign of deep unworthiness
within himself. He who would still preserve the ego's goals and serve
them as his own makes no mistakes according to the dictates of his
guide. This guidance teaches it is error to believe that sins are but
mistakes, for who would suffer for his sins if this were so?

^12^ And so we come to the criterion for choice which is the hardest to
believe, because its obviousness is overlaid with many levels of
obscurity. If you feel any guilt about your choice, you have allowed the
ego's goals to come between the real alternatives, and thus you do not
realize there are but two. And the alternative you think you chose seems
fearful and too dangerous to be the nothingness it actually is.

^13^All things are valuable or valueless, worthy or not of being sought
at all, entirely desirable or not worth the slightest effort to obtain.
Choosing is easy just because of this. Complexity is nothing but a
screen of smoke which hides the very simple fact that no decision can be
difficult.

^14^What is the gain to you in learning this? It is far more than merely
letting you make choices easily and without pain. Heaven Itself is
reached by empty hands and open minds, which come with nothing to find
everything and claim it as their own. We will attempt to reach this
state today, with self-deception laid aside and with an honest
willingness to value but the truly valuable and the real.

^15^ Our two extended practice periods of 15 minutes will begin with
this:

*^16^ I will not value what is valueless,\
And only what has value do I seek,\
For only that do I desire to find.*

^17^ And then receive what waits for everyone who reaches unencumbered
to the gate of Heaven, which swings open as he comes. Should you begin
to let yourself collect some needless burdens or believe you see some
difficult decisions facing you, be quick to answer with this simple
thought:

*^18^ I will not value what is valueless,\
For what is valuable belongs to me.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 134 Let me perceive forgiveness as it is**](#part0004.html#level-403) {#part0042_split_024.html#h1-403 .level1}

^1^ Let us review the meaning of "forgive," for it is apt to be
distorted and to be perceived as something which entails an unfair
sacrifice of righteous wrath, a gift unjustified and undeserved, and a
complete denial of the truth. In such a view, forgiveness must be seen
as mere eccentric folly, and this course appear to rest salvation on a
whim.

^2^ This twisted view of what forgiveness means is easily corrected when
you can accept the fact that pardon is not asked for what is true. It
must be limited to what is false. It is irrelevant to everything except
illusions. Truth is God's creation, and to pardon this is meaningless.
All truth belongs to Him, reflects His laws and radiates His Love. Does
this need pardon? How can you forgive the sinless and eternally benign?

^3^ The major difficulty that you find in genuine forgiveness on your
part is that you still believe you must forgive the truth and not
illusions. You conceive of pardon as a vain attempt to look past what is
there; to overlook the truth in an unfounded effort to deceive yourself
by making an illusion true. This twisted viewpoint but reflects the hold
that the idea of sin retains as yet upon your mind as you regard
yourself.

^4^ Because you think your sins are real, you look on pardon as
deception. For it is impossible to think of sin as true and not believe
forgiveness is a lie. Thus is forgiveness really but a sin, like all the
rest. It says the truth is false and smiles on the corrupt as if they
were as blameless as the grass; as white as snow. It is delusional in
what it thinks it can accomplish. It would see as right the plainly
wrong, the loathsome as the good.

^5^ Pardon is no escape in such a view. It merely is a further sign that
sin is unforgivable, at best to be concealed, denied, or called another
name, for pardon is a treachery to truth. Guilt can not be forgiven. If
you sin, your guilt is everlasting. Those who are forgiven from the view
their sins are real are pitifully mocked and twice condemned-first by
themselves for what they think they did and once again by those who
pardon them.

^6^ It is sin's unreality that makes forgiveness natural and wholly
sane, a deep relief to those who offer it; a quiet blessing where it is
received. It does not countenance illusions but collects them lightly
with a little laugh and gently lays them at the feet of truth. And there
they disappear entirely.

^7^ Forgiveness is the only thing that stands for truth in the illusions
of the world. It sees their nothingness and looks right through the
thousand forms in which they may appear. It looks on lies but it is not
deceived. It does not heed the self-accusing shrieks of sinners mad with
guilt. It looks on them with quiet eyes and merely says to them, "My
brother, what you think is not the truth."

^8^ The strength of pardon is its honesty, which is so uncorrupted that
it sees illusions as illusions, not as truth. It is because of this that
it becomes the undeceiver in the face of lies, the great restorer of the
simple truth. By its ability to overlook what is not there, it opens up
the way to truth, which had been blocked by dreams of guilt.

^9^ Now are you free to follow in the way your true forgiveness opens up
to you. For if one brother has received this gift of you, the door is
open to yourself. There is a very simple way to find the door to true
forgiveness and perceive it open wide in welcome. When you feel that you
are tempted to accuse someone of sin in any form, do not allow your mind
to dwell on what you think he did, for this is self-deception. Ask
instead, "Should I accuse myself of doing this?"

^10^ Thus will you see alternatives for choice in terms which render
choosing meaningful and keep your mind as free of guilt and pain as God
Himself intended it to be and as it is in truth. It is but lies which
would condemn. In truth is innocence the only thing there is.
Forgiveness stands between illusions and the truth, between the world
you see and that which lies beyond, between the hell of guilt and
Heaven's gate.

^11^ Across this bridge, as powerful as Love Which laid Its blessing on
it, are all dreams of evil and of hatred and attack brought silently to
truth. They are not kept to swell and bluster and to terrify the foolish
dreamer who believes in them. He has been gently wakened from his dream
by understanding what he thought he saw was never there. And now he
cannot feel that all escape has been denied to him.

^12^ He does not have to fight to save himself. He does not have to kill
the dragons which he thought pursued him. Nor need he erect the heavy
walls of stone and iron doors he thought would make him safe. He can
remove the ponderous and useless armor made to chain his mind to fear
and misery. His step is light, and as he lifts his foot to stride ahead,
a star is left behind to point the way to those who follow him.

^13^ Forgiveness must be practiced, for the world cannot perceive its
meaning nor provide a guide to teach you its beneficence. There is no
thought in all the world which leads to any understanding of the laws it
follows nor the Thought which it reflects. It is as alien to the world
as is your own reality. And yet it joins your mind with the reality in
you.

^14^Today we practice true forgiveness that the time of joining be no
more delayed. For we would meet with our reality in freedom and in
peace. Our practicing becomes the footsteps lightening up the way for
all our brothers, who will follow us to the reality we share with them.

^15^ That this may be accomplished, let us give a quarter of an hour
twice today and spend it with the Guide Who understands the meaning of
forgiveness and was sent to us to teach it. Let us ask of Him:

*^16^ Let me perceive forgiveness as it is.*

^17^ Then choose one brother as He will direct, and catalogue his
"sins," as one by one they cross your mind. Be certain not to dwell on
any one of them, but realize that you are using his "offenses" but to
save the world from all ideas of sin. Briefly consider all the evil
things you thought of him, and each time ask yourself "Would I condemn
myself for doing this?"

^18^ Let him be freed from all the thoughts you had of sin in him. And
now you are prepared for freedom. If you have been practicing thus far
in willingness and honesty, you will begin to sense a lifting up, a
lightening of weight across your chest, a deep and certain feeling of
relief. The time remaining should be given to experiencing the escape
from all the heavy chains you sought to lay upon your brother which were
laid upon yourself.

^19^ Forgiveness should be practiced through the day, for there will be
so many times when you forget its meaning and attack yourself. When this
occurs, allow your mind to see through this illusion as you tell
yourself:

*^20^ Let me perceive forgiveness as it is.\
Should I accuse myself of doing this?\
I will not lay this chain upon myself.*

^21^ In everything you do, remember this:

*^22^ No one is crucified alone, and yet\
No one can enter Heaven by himself.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 135 If I defend myself, I am attacked**](#part0004.html#level-404) {#part0042_split_025.html#h1-404 .level1}

^1^ Who would defend himself unless he thought he was attacked, that the
attack is real, and that his own defense can save himself? And herein
lies the folly of defense-it gives illusions full reality and then
attempts to handle them as real. It adds illusions to illusions, thus
making correction doubly difficult.

^2^ And it is this you do when you attempt to plan the future, activate
the past, or organize the present as you wish. You operate from the
belief you must protect yourself from what is happening because it must
contain what threatens you. A sense of threat is an acknowledgment of an
inherent weakness, a belief that there is danger which has power to call
on you to make appropriate defense.

^3^ The world is based on this insane belief. And all its structures,
all its thoughts and doubts, its penalties and heavy armaments, its
legal definitions and its codes, its ethics and its leaders and its
gods, all serve but to preserve its sense of threat. For no one walks
the world in armature but must have terror striking at his heart.

^4^ Defense is frightening. It stems from fear, increasing fear as each
defense is made. You think it offers safety. Yet it speaks of fear made
real and terror justified. Is it not strange you do not pause to ask, as
you elaborate your plans and make your armor thicker and your locks more
tight, what you defend, and how, and against what?

^5^ Let us consider first what you defend. It must be something that is
very weak and easily assaulted. It must be something made easy prey,
unable to protect itself, and needing your defense. What but the body
has such frailty that constant care and watchful, deep concern is
needful to protect its little life? What but the body falters and must
fail to serve the Son of God as worthy host?

^6^ Yet it is not the body that can fear, nor be a thing to fear. It has
no need but those which you assign to it. It needs no complicated
structures of defense, no health-inducing medicine, no care, and no
concern at all. Defend its life, or give it gifts to make it beautiful
or walls to make it safe, and you but say your home is open to the thief
of time, corruptible and crumbling, so unsafe it must be guarded with
your very life.

^7^ Is not this picture fearful? Can you be at peace with such a concept
of your home? Yet what endowed the body with the right to serve you thus
except your own belief? It is your mind which gave the body all the
functions that you see in it and set its value far beyond a little pile
of dust and water. Who would make defense of something that he
recognized as this?

^8^ The body is in need of no defense. This cannot be too often
emphasized. It will be strong and healthy if the mind does not abuse it
by assigning it to roles it cannot fill, to purposes beyond its scope,
and to exalted aims which it cannot accomplish. Such attempts,
ridiculous yet deeply cherished, are the sources for the many mad
attacks you make upon it. For it seems to fail your hopes, your needs,
your values, and your dreams.

^9^ The "self" that needs protection is not real. The body, valueless
and hardly worth the least defense, need merely be perceived as quite
apart from you, and it becomes a healthy, serviceable instrument through
which the mind can operate until its usefulness is over. Who would want
to keep it when its usefulness is done?

^10^ Defend the body, and you have attacked your mind. For you have seen
in it the faults, the weaknesses, the limits, and the lacks from which
you think the body must be saved. You will not see the mind as separate
from bodily conditions. And you will impose upon the body all the pain
that comes from the conception of the mind as limited and fragile, and
apart from other minds and separate from its Source.

^11^ These are the thoughts in need of healing, and the body will
respond with health when they have been corrected and replaced with
truth. This is the body's only real defense. Yet is this where you look
for its defense? You offer it protection of a kind from which it gains
no benefit at all but merely adds to your distress of mind. You do not
heal but merely take away the hope of healing, for you fail to see where
hope must lie if it be meaningful.

^12^ A healed mind does not plan. It carries out the plans which it
receives through listening to Wisdom that is not its own. It waits until
it has been taught what should be done and then proceeds to do it. It
does not depend upon itself for anything except its adequacy to fulfill
the plans assigned to it. It is secure in certainty that obstacles
cannot impede its progress to accomplishment of any goal which serves
the greater plan established for the good of everyone.

^13^ A healed mind is relieved from the belief that it must plan,
although it cannot know the outcome which is best, the means by which it
is achieved, nor how to recognize the problem that the plan is made to
solve. It must misuse the body in its plans until it recognizes this is
so. But when it has accepted this as true, then is it healed and lets
the body go.

^14^ Enslavement of the body to the plans the unhealed mind sets up to
save itself must make the body sick. It is not free to be a means of
helping in a plan which far exceeds its own protection and which needs
its service for a little while. In this capacity is health assured. For
everything the mind employs for this will function flawlessly and with
the strength that has been given it and cannot fail.

^15^ It is, perhaps, not easy to perceive that self-initiated plans are
but defenses with the purpose all of them were made to realize. They are
the means by which a frightened mind would undertake its own protection
at the cost of truth. This is not difficult to realize in some forms
which these self-deceptions take, for the denial of reality is very
obvious. Yet planning is not often recognized as a defense.

^16^ The mind engaged in planning for itself is occupied in setting up
control of future happenings. It does not think that it will be provided
for unless it makes its own provisions. Time becomes a future emphasis
to be controlled by learning and experience obtained from past events
and previous beliefs. It overlooks the present, for it rests on the idea
the past has taught enough to let the mind direct its future course.

^17^The mind that plans is thus refusing to allow for change. What it
has learned before becomes the basis for its future goals. Its past
experience directs its choice of what will happen. And it does not see
that here and now is everything it needs to guarantee a future quite
unlike the past without a continuity of any old ideas and sick beliefs.
Anticipation plays no part at all, for present confidence directs the
way.

^18^ Defenses are the plans you undertake to make against the truth.
Their aim is to select what you approve and disregard what you consider
incompatible with your beliefs of your reality. Yet what remains is
meaningless indeed. For it is your reality which is the "threat" that
your defenses would attack, obscure, and take apart and crucify.

^19^ What could you not accept if you but knew that everything that
happens, all events, past, present, and to come, are gently planned by
One Whose only purpose is your good? Perhaps you have misunderstood His
plan, for He would never offer pain to you. But your defenses did not
let you see His loving blessing shine in every step you ever took. While
you made plans for death, He led you gently to eternal life.

^20^ Your present trust in Him is the defense which promises a future
undisturbed, without a trace of sorrow and with joy which constantly
increases as this life becomes a holy instant, set in time but heeding
only immortality. Let no defenses but your present trust direct the
future, and this life becomes a meaningful encounter with the truth that
only your defenses would conceal.

^21^ Without defenses, you become a light which Heaven gratefully
acknowledges to be its own. And it will lead you on in ways appointed
for your happiness according to the ancient plan begun when time was
born. Your followers will join their light with yours, and it will be
increased until the world is lighted up with joy. And gladly will our
brothers lay aside their cumbersome defenses which availed them nothing
and could only terrify.

^22^ We will anticipate that time today with present confidence, for
this is part of what was planned for us. We will be sure that everything
we need is given us for our accomplishment of this today. We make no
plans for how it will be done but realize that our defenselessness is
all that is required for the truth to dawn upon our minds with
certainty.

^23^ For 15 minutes twice today, we rest from senseless planning and
from every thought which blocks the truth from entering our minds. Today
we will receive instead of plan, that we may give instead of organize.
And we are given truly, as we say:

*^24^ If I defend myself, I am attacked.\
But in defenselessness, I will be strong,\
And I will learn what my defenses hide.*

^25^ Nothing but that. If there are plans to make, you will be told of
them. They may not be the plans you thought were needed nor indeed the
answers to the problems which you thought confronted you. But they are
answers to another kind of question which remains unanswered yet in need
of answering until the Answer comes to you at last.

^26^ All your defenses have been aimed at not receiving what you will
receive today. And in the light and joy of simple truth, you will but
wonder why you ever thought that you must be defended from release.
Heaven asks nothing. It is hell that makes extravagant demands for
sacrifice. You give up nothing in these times today when undefended you
present yourself to your Creator as you really are.

^27^ He has remembered you. Today we will remember Him. For this is
Easter time in your salvation. And you rise again from what was seeming
death and hopelessness. Now is the light of hope reborn in you, for now
you come without defense to learn the part for you within the plan of
God. What little plans or magical beliefs can still have value when you
have received your function from the Voice of God Himself?

^28^ Try not to shape this day as you believe would benefit you most.
For you can not conceive of all the happiness that comes to you without
your planning. Learn today. And all the world will take this giant
stride and celebrate your Easter time with you. Throughout the day, as
foolish little things appear to raise defensiveness in you and tempt you
to engage in weaving plans, remind yourself this is a special day for
learning, and acknowledge it with this:

*^29^ This is my Easter time. And I would keep It holy.\
I will not defend myself,\
Because the Son of God needs no defense\
Against the truth of his reality.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 136 Sickness is a defense against the truth**](#part0004.html#level-405) {#part0042_split_026.html#h1-405 .level1}

^1^ No one can heal unless he understands what purpose sickness seems to
serve. For then he understands as well its purpose has no meaning. Being
causeless and without a meaningful intent of any kind, it cannot be at
all. When this is seen, healing is automatic. It dispels this
meaningless illusion by the same approach that carries all of them to
truth and merely leaves them there to disappear.

^2^ Sickness is not an accident. Like all defenses, it is an insane
device for self-deception. And like all the rest, its purpose is to hide
reality, attack it, change it, render it inept, distort it, twist it, or
reduce it to a little pile of unassembled parts. The aim of all defenses
is to keep the truth from being whole. The parts are seen as if each one
were whole within itself.

^3^ Defenses are not unintentional nor are they made without awareness.
They are secret magic wands you wave when truth appears to threaten what
you would believe. They seem to be unconscious but because of the
rapidity with which you choose to use them. In that second, even less,
in which the choice is made, you recognize exactly what you would
attempt to do and then proceed to think that it is done.

^4^ Who but yourself evaluates a threat, decides escape is necessary,
and sets up a series of defenses to reduce the threat that has been
judged as real? All this cannot be done unconsciously. But afterwards
your plan requires that you must forget you made it, so it seems to be
external to your own intent-a happening beyond your state of mind, an
outcome with a real effect on you instead of one effected by your self.

^5^ It is this quick forgetting of the part you play in making your
"reality" which makes defenses seem to be beyond your own control. But
what you have forgot can be remembered, given willingness to reconsider
the decision which is doubly shielded by oblivion. Your not remembering
is but the sign that this decision still remains in force as far as your
desires are concerned.

^6^ Mistake this not for fact. Defenses must make facts unrecognizable.
They aim at doing this, and this they seem to do. Every defense takes
fragments of the whole, assembles them without regard to all their true
relationships, and thus constructs illusions of a whole which is not
there. It is this process which imposes threat, and not whatever outcome
may result.

^7^ When parts are wrested from the whole and seen as separate and
wholes within themselves, they become symbols standing for attack upon
the whole, successful in effect, and never to be seen as whole again.
And yet you have forgotten that they stand but for your own decision of
what should be real, to take the place of what is real.

^8^ Sickness is a decision. It is not a thing that happens to you quite
unsought, which makes you weak and brings you suffering. It is a choice
you make, a plan you lay when for an instant truth arises in your own
deluded mind and all your world appears to totter and prepare to fall.
Now are you sick that truth may go away and threaten your establishments
no more.

^9^ How do you think that sickness can succeed in shielding you from
truth? Because it proves the body is not separate from you, and so you
must be separate from the truth. You suffer pain because the body does,
and in this pain are you made one with it. Thus is your "true" identity
preserved and the strange, haunting thought that you might be something
beyond this little pile of dust silenced and stilled. For see, this dust
can make you suffer, twist your limbs, and stop your heart, commanding
you to die and cease to be.

^10^ Thus is the body stronger than the truth, which asks you live but
cannot overcome your choice to die. And so the body is more powerful
than everlasting life, Heaven more frail than hell, and God's design for
the salvation of His Son opposed by a decision stronger than His Will.
His Son is dust, the Father incomplete, and chaos sits in triumph on His
throne.

^11^ Such is your planning for your own defense. And you believe that
Heaven quails before such mad attacks as these, with God made blind by
your illusions, truth turned into lies, and all the universe made slave
to laws which your defenses would impose on it. Yet who believes
illusions but the one who made them up? Who else can see them and react
to them as if they were the truth?

^12^ God knows not of your plans to change His Will. The universe
remains unheeding of the laws by which you thought to govern it. And
Heaven has not bowed to hell, nor life to death. You can but choose to
think you die or suffer sickness or distort the truth in any way. What
is created is apart from all of this. Defenses are plans to defeat what
cannot be attacked. What is unalterable cannot change. And what is
wholly sinless cannot sin.

^13^Such is the simple truth. It does not make appeal to might nor
triumph. It does not command obedience nor seek to prove how pitiful and
futile are your attempts to plan defenses which would alter it. It
merely wants to give you happiness, for such its purpose is. Perhaps it
sighs a little when you throw away its gifts, and yet it knows with
perfect certainty that what God wills for you must be received.

^14^ It is this fact which demonstrates that time is an illusion. For it
lets you think what God has given you is not the truth right now, as it
must be. The Thoughts of God are quite apart from time. For time is but
another meaningless defense you made against the truth. Yet what God
wills is here, and you remain as He created you.

^15^ Truth has a power far beyond defense, for no illusions can remain
where it has been allowed to enter. And it comes to any mind that would
lay down its arms and cease to play with folly. It is found at any
time-today, if you will choose to practice giving welcome to the truth.
This is our aim today. And we will give a quarter of an hour twice to
ask the truth to come to us and set us free.

^16^ And truth will come, for it has never been apart from us. It merely
waits for just this invitation which we give today. We introduce it with
a healing prayer to help us rise above defensiveness and let the truth
be as it has always been:

*^17^ Sickness is a defense against the truth.\
I will accept the truth of what I am\
And let my mind be wholly healed today.*

^18^ Healing will flash across your open mind as peace and truth arise
to take the place of war and vain imaginings. There will be no dark
corners sickness can conceal and keep defended from the light of truth.
There will be no dim figures from your dreams nor their obscure and
meaningless pursuits with double purposes insanely sought, remaining in
your mind. It will be healed of all the sickly wishes that it tried to
authorize the body to obey.

^19^ Now is the body healed because the source of sickness has been
opened to relief. And you will recognize you practiced well by this-the
body should not feel at all. If you have been successful, there will be
no sense of feeling ill or feeling well, of pain or pleasure. No
response at all is in the mind to what the body does. Its usefulness
remains and nothing more.

^20^ Perhaps you do not realize that this removes the limits you had
placed upon the body by the purposes you gave to it. As these are laid
aside, the strength the body has will always be enough to serve all
truly useful purposes. The body's health is fully guaranteed because it
is not limited by time, by weather or fatigue, by food and drink, or any
laws you made it serve before. You need do nothing now to make it well,
for sickness has become impossible.

^21^ Yet this protection needs to be preserved by careful watching. If
you let your mind harbor attack thoughts, yield to judgment, or make
plans against uncertainties to come, you have again misplaced yourself,
and made a bodily identity which will attack the body, for the mind is
sick. Give instant remedy should this occur by not allowing your
defensiveness to hurt you longer. Do not be confused about what must be
healed, but tell yourself:

*^22^ I have forgotten what I really am,\
For I mistook my body for myself.\
Sickness is a defense against the truth,\
But I am not a body. And my mind\
Cannot attack. So I can not be sick.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 137 When I am healed, I am not healed alone**](#part0004.html#level-406) {#part0042_split_027.html#h1-406 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea remains the central thought on which salvation rests.
For healing is the opposite of all the world's ideas which dwell on
sickness and on separate states. Sickness is a retreat from others and a
shutting off of joining. It becomes a door that closes on a separate
self and keeps it isolated and alone.

^2^ Sickness is isolation. For it seems to keep one self apart from all
the rest to suffer what the others do not feel. It gives the body final
power to make the separation real and keep the mind in solitary prison,
split apart and held in pieces by a solid wall of sickened flesh which
it can not surmount. The world obeys the laws that sickness serves, but
healing operates apart from them.

^3^ It is impossible that anyone be healed alone. In sickness must he be
apart and separate. But healing is his own decision to be one again and
to accept his Self with all its parts intact and unassailed. In sickness
does his Self appear to be dismembered and without the unity that gives
it life. But healing is accomplished as he sees the body has no power to
attack the universal oneness of God's Son.

^4^ Sickness would prove that lies must be the truth. But healing
demonstrates that truth is true. The separation sickness would impose
has never really happened. To be healed is merely to accept what always
was the simple truth and always will remain exactly as it has forever
been. Yet eyes accustomed to illusions must be shown that what they look
upon is false. So healing, never needed by the truth, must demonstrate
that sickness is not real.

^5^ Healing might thus be called a counter-dream which cancels out the
dream of sickness in the name of truth but not in truth itself. Just as
forgiveness overlooks all sins that never were accomplished, healing but
removes illusions that have not occurred. Just as the real world will
arise to take the place of what has never been at all, healing offers
restitution for imagined states and false ideas which dreams embroider
into pictures of the truth.

^6^ Yet think not healing is unworthy of your function here. For
anti-Christ becomes more powerful than Christ to those who dream the
world is real. The body seems to be more solid and more stable than the
mind. And love becomes a dream, while fear remains the one reality that
can be seen and justified and fully understood.

^7^ Just as forgiveness shines away all sin and the real world will
occupy the place of what you made, so healing must replace the fantasies
of sickness which you hold before the simple truth. When sickness has
been seen to disappear in spite of all the laws that hold it cannot but
be real, then questions have been answered. And the laws can be no
longer cherished nor obeyed.

^8^ Healing is freedom. For it demonstrates that dreams will not prevail
against the truth. Healing is shared. And by this attribute, it proves
that laws unlike the ones which hold that sickness is inevitable are
more potent than their sickly opposites. Healing is strength. For by its
gentle hand is weakness overcome. And minds which were walled off within
a body free to join with other minds, to be forever strong.

^9^ Healing, forgiveness, and the glad exchange of all the world of
sorrow for a world where sadness cannot enter, are the means by which
the Holy Spirit urges you to follow Him. His gentle lessons teach how
easily salvation can be yours, how little practice you need undertake to
let His laws replace the ones you made to hold yourself a prisoner to
death.

^10^ His life becomes your own as you extend the little help He asks in
freeing you from everything that ever caused you pain. And as you let
yourself be healed, you see all those around you or who cross your mind
or whom you touch or those who seem to have no contact with you healed
along with you. Perhaps you will not recognize them all, nor realize how
great your offering to all the world when you let healing come to you.
But you are never healed alone. And legions upon legions will receive
the gift which you receive when you are healed.

^11^ Those who are healed become the instruments of healing. Nor does
time elapse between the instant they are healed and all the grace of
healing it is given them to give. What is opposed to God does not exist.
And who accepts it not within his mind becomes a haven where the weary
can remain to rest. For here is truth bestowed, and here are all
illusions brought to truth.

^12^ Would you not offer shelter to God's Will? You but invite your Self
to be at home, and can this invitation be refused? Ask the inevitable to
occur, and you will never fail. The other choice is but to ask what
cannot be to be, and this cannot succeed. Today we ask that only truth
will occupy our minds, that thoughts of healing will this day go forth
from what is healed to what must yet be healed, aware that they will
both occur as one.

^13^ We will remember, as the hour strikes, our function is to let our
minds be healed that we may carry healing to the world, exchanging curse
for blessing, pain for joy, and separation for the peace of God. Is not
a minute of the hour worth the giving to receive a gift like this? Is
not a little time a small expense to offer for the gift of everything?

^14^ Yet must we be prepared for such a gift. And so we will begin the
day with this and give ten minutes to these thoughts with which we will
conclude today at night as well:

*^15^ When I am healed, I am not healed alone.\
And I would share my healing with the world,\
That sickness may be banished from the mind\
Of God's one Son, Who is my only Self.*

^16^ Let healing be through you this very day. And as you rest in quiet,
be prepared to give as you receive, to hold but what you give, and to
receive the Word of God to take the place of all the foolish thoughts
that ever were imagined. Now we come together to make well all that was
sick and offer blessing where there was attack. Nor will we let this
function be forgot as every hour of the day slips by, remembering our
function with this thought:

*^17^ When I am healed, I am not healed alone.\
And I would bless my brothers, for I would\
Be healed with them as they are healed with me.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 138 Heaven is the decision I must make**](#part0004.html#level-407) {#part0042_split_028.html#h1-407 .level1}

^1^ In this world, Heaven is a choice because here we believe there are
alternatives to choose between. We think that all things have an
opposite, and what we want we choose. If Heaven exists, there must be
hell as well, for contradiction is the way we make what we perceive and
what we think is real. Creation knows no opposite. But here is
opposition part of being "real."

^2^ It is this strange perception of the truth that makes the choice of
Heaven seem to be the same as the relinquishment of hell. It is not
really thus. Yet what is true in God's creation cannot enter here unless
it is reflected in some form the world can understand. Truth cannot come
where it could only be perceived with fear, for this would be the error
truth can be brought to illusions. Opposition makes the truth unwelcome,
and it cannot come.

^3^ Choice is the obvious escape from what appears as opposites.
Decision lets one of conflicting goals become the aim of effort and
expenditure of time. Without decision, time is but a waste and effort
dissipated. It is spent for nothing in return. And time goes by without
results. There is no sense of gain, for nothing is accomplished; nothing
learned.

^4^ You need to be reminded that you think a thousand choices are
confronting you when there is really only one to make. And even this but
seems to be a choice. Do not confuse yourself with all the doubts that
myriad decisions would induce. You make but one. And when that one is
made, you will perceive it was no choice at all, for truth is true and
nothing else is real. There is no opposite to choose instead. There is
no contradiction to the truth.

^5^ Choosing depends on learning. But the truth cannot be learned but
only recognized. In recognition its acceptance lies, and as it is
accepted, it is known. But knowledge is beyond the goals we seek to
teach within the framework of this course. Ours are teaching goals to be
attained through learning how to reach them, what they are, and what
they offer you. Decisions are the outcome of your learning, for they
rest on what you have accepted as the truth of what you are and what
your needs must be.

^6^ In this insanely complicated world, Heaven appears to take the form
of choice rather than merely being what it is. Of all the choices you
have tried to make, this is the simplest, most definitive, the prototype
of all the rest, the one which settles all decisions. If you could
decide the rest, this one remains unsolved. But when you solve this one,
the others are resolved with it, for all decisions but conceal this one
by taking different forms. Here is the final and the only choice in
which is truth accepted or denied.

^7^ So we begin today considering the choice that time was made to help
us make. Such is its holy purpose, now transformed from the intent you
gave it, that it be a means for demonstrating hell is real, hope changes
to despair, and life itself must in the end be overcome by death. In
death alone are opposites resolved, for ending opposition is to die. And
thus salvation must be seen as death, for life is seen as conflict. To
resolve the conflict is to end your life as well.

^8^ These mad beliefs can gain unconscious hold of great intensity and
grip the mind with terror and anxiety so strong that it will not
relinquish its ideas about its own protection. It must be saved from
salvation, threatened to be safe, and magically armored against truth.
And these decisions are made unaware to keep them safely undisturbed,
apart from question and from reason and from doubt.

^9^ Heaven is chosen consciously. The choice cannot be made until
alternatives are accurately seen and understood. All that is veiled in
shadows must be raised to understanding to be judged again, this time
with Heaven's help, and all mistakes in judgment which the mind had made
before are open to correction as the truth dismisses them as causeless.
Now are they without effects. They cannot be concealed because their
nothingness is recognized.

^10^The conscious choice of Heaven is as sure as is the ending of the
fear of hell when it is raised from its protective shield of unawareness
and is brought to light. Who can decide between the clearly seen and the
unrecognized? Yet who can fail to make a choice between alternatives
when only one is seen as valuable, the other as a wholly worthless
thing, a but imagined source of guilt and pain? Who hesitates to make a
choice like this? And shall we hesitate to choose today?

^11^ We make the choice for Heaven as we wake and spend five minutes
making sure that we have made the one decision that is sane. We
recognize we make a conscious choice between what has existence and what
has nothing but an appearance of the truth. Its pseudo-being, brought to
what is real, is flimsy and transparent in the light. It holds no terror
now, for what was made enormous, vengeful, pitiless with hate demands
obscurity for fear to be invested there. Now it is recognized as but a
foolish, trivial mistake.

^12^ Before we close our eyes in sleep tonight, we reaffirm the choice
that we have made each hour in between. And now we give the last five
minutes of our waking day to the decision with which we awoke. As every
hour passed, we have declared our choice again in a brief quiet time
devoted to maintaining sanity. And finally we close the day with this,
acknowledging we chose but what we want:

*^13^ Heaven is the decision I must make.\
I make it now and will not change my mind,\
Because it is the only thing I want.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 139 I will accept Atonement for myself**](#part0004.html#level-408) {#part0042_split_029.html#h1-408 .level1}

^1^ Here is the end of choice. For here we come to a decision to accept
ourselves as God created us. And what is choice except uncertainty of
what we are? There is no doubt that is not rooted here. There is no
question but reflects this one. There is no conflict that does not
entail the single simple question, "What am I?"

^2^ Yet who could ask this question except one who has refused to
recognize himself? Only refusal to accept yourself could make the
question seem to be sincere. The only thing that can be surely known by
any living thing is what it is. From this one point of certainty it
looks on other things as certain as itself. Uncertainty about what you
must be is self-deception on a scale so vast its magnitude can hardly be
conceived.

^3^ To be alive and not to know yourself is to believe that you are
really dead. For what is life except to be yourself, and what but you
can be alive instead? Who is the doubter? What is it he doubts? Whom
does he question? Who can answer him? He merely states that he is not
himself and therefore, being something else, becomes a questioner of
what that something is.

^4^ Yet he could never be alive at all unless he knew the answer. If he
asks as if he did not know, it merely shows he does not want to be the
thing he is. He has accepted it because he lives, has judged against it
and denied its worth, and has decided that he does not know the only
certainty by which he lives. Thus he becomes uncertain of his life, for
what it is has been denied by him.

^5^ It is for this denial that you need Atonement. Your denial made no
change in what you are. But you have split your mind into what knows and
does not know the truth. You are yourself. There is no doubt of this,
and yet you doubt it. But you do not ask what part of you can really
doubt yourself. It cannot really be a part of you that asks this
question, for it asks of one who knows the answer. Were it part of you,
certainty would be impossible.

^6^Atonement remedies the strange idea that it is possible to doubt
yourself and be unsure of what you really are. This is the depth of
madness. Yet it is the universal question of the world. What does this
prove except the world is mad? Why share its madness in the sad belief
that what is universal here is true? Nothing the world believes is true.
It is a place whose purpose is to be a home where those who claim they
do not know themselves can come to question what it is they are.

^7^ And they will come again until the time Atonement is accepted, and
they learn it is impossible to doubt yourself and not to be aware of
what you are. Only acceptance can be asked of you, for what you are is
certain. It is set forever in the holy Mind of God and in your own. It
is so far beyond all doubt and question that to ask what it must be is
all the proof you need to show that you believe the contradiction that
you know not what you cannot fail to know.

^8^ Is this a question or a statement which denies itself in statement?
Let us not allow our holy minds to occupy themselves with senseless
musings such as this. We have a mission here. We did not come to
reinforce the madness which we once believed in. Let us not forget the
goal that we accepted. It is more than just our happiness alone we came
to gain. What we accept as what we are proclaims what everyone must be
along with us.

^9^ Fail not your brothers, or you fail yourself. Look lovingly on them
that they may know that they are part of you and you of them. This does
Atonement teach and demonstrates the oneness of God's Son is unassailed
by his belief he knows not what he is. Today accept Atonement, not to
change reality, but merely to accept the truth about yourself and go
your way rejoicing in the endless Love of God. It is but this that we
are asked to do. It is but this that we will do today.

^10^ Five minutes in the morning and at night we will devote to dedicate
our minds to our assignment for today. We start with this review of what
our mission is:

*^11^ I will accept Atonement for myself,\
For I remain as God created me.*

^12^ We have not lost the knowledge that God gave to us when He created
us like Him. We can remember it for everyone, for in creation are all
minds as one and in our memory is the recall how dear our brothers are
to us in truth, how much a part of us is every mind, how faithful they
have really been to us, and how our Father's Love contains us all.

^13^In thanks for all creation, in the name of its Creator and His
oneness with all aspects of creation, we repeat our dedication to our
cause today each hour, as we lay aside all thoughts that would distract
us from our holy aim. For several minutes let your mind be cleared of
all the foolish cobwebs which the world would weave around the holy Son
of God. And learn the fragile nature of the chains that seem to keep the
knowledge of yourself apart from your awareness, as you say:

*^14^ I will accept Atonement for myself,\
For I remain as God created me.*
:::

[]{#part0042_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 140 Only salvation can be said to cure**](#part0004.html#level-409) {#part0042_split_030.html#h1-409 .level1}

^1^ Cure is a word that cannot be applied to any remedy the world
accepts as beneficial. What the world perceives as therapeutic is but
what will make the body "better." When it tries to heal the mind, it
sees no separation from the body, where it thinks the mind exists. Its
forms of healing thus must substitute illusion for illusion. One belief
in sickness takes another form, and so the patient now perceives himself
as well.

^2^ He is not healed. He merely had a dream that he was sick, and in the
dream he found a magic formula to make him well. Yet he has not awakened
from the dream, and so his mind remains exactly as it was before. He has
not seen the light that would awaken him and end the dream. What
difference does the content of a dream make in reality? One either
sleeps or wakens. There is nothing in between.

^3^ The happy dreams the Holy Spirit brings are different from the
dreaming of the world, where one can merely dream he is awake. The
dreams forgiveness lets the mind perceive do not induce another form of
sleep, so that the dreamer dreams another dream. His happy dreams are
heralds of the dawn of truth upon the mind. They lead from sleep to
gentle waking, so that dreams are gone. And thus they cure for all
eternity.

^4^ Atonement heals with certainty and cures all sickness. For the mind
which understands that sickness can be nothing but a dream is not
deceived by forms the dream may take. Sickness where guilt is absent
cannot come, for it is but another form of guilt. Atonement does not
heal the sick, for that is not a cure. It takes away the guilt that
makes the sickness possible. And that is cure indeed. For sickness now
is gone, with nothing left to which it can return.

^5^ Peace be to you who have been cured in God and not in idle dreams.
For cure must come from holiness, and holiness can not be found where
sin is cherished. God abides in holy temples. He is barred where sin has
entered. Yet there is no place where He is not. And therefore sin can
have no home in which to hide from His beneficence. There is no place
where holiness is not, and nowhere sin and sickness can abide.

^6^ This is the thought that cures. It does not make distinctions among
unrealities. Nor does it seek to heal what is not sick, unmindful where
the need for healing is. This is no magic. It is merely an appeal to
truth which cannot fail to heal and heal forever. It is not a thought
which judges an illusion by its size, its seeming gravity, or anything
that is related to the form it takes. It merely focuses on what it is
and knows that no illusion can be real.

^7^ Let us not try today to seek to cure what cannot suffer sickness.
Healing must be sought but where it is and then applied to what is sick
so that it can be cured. There is no remedy the world provides that can
effect a change in anything. The mind that brings illusions to the truth
is really changed. There is no change but this. For how can one illusion
differ from another but in attributes that have no substance, no
reality, no core, and nothing that is truly different?

^8^ Today we seek to change our minds about the source of sickness, for
we seek a cure for all illusions, not another shift among them. We will
try today to find the source of healing, which is in our minds because
our Father placed it there for us. It is not further from us than
ourselves. It is as near to us as our own thoughts-so close it is
impossible to lose. We need but seek it, and it must be found.

^9^ We will not be misled today by what appears to us as sick. We go
beyond appearances today and reach the source of healing from which
nothing is exempt. We will succeed to the extent to which we realize
that there can never be a meaningful distinction made between what is
untrue and equally untrue. Here there are no degrees and no beliefs that
what does not exist is truer in some forms than others. All of them are
false and can be cured because they are not true.

^10^ So do we lay aside our amulets, our charms and medicines, our
chants and bits of magic in whatever form they took. We will be still
and listen for the Voice of healing which will cure all ills as one,
restoring saneness to the Son of God. No voice but this can cure. Today
we hear a single Voice Which speaks to us of truth where all illusions
end, and peace returns to the eternal quiet home of God.

^11^ We waken hearing Him and let Him speak to us five minutes as the
day begins and end the day by listening again five minutes more before
we go to sleep. Our only preparation is to let our interfering thoughts
be laid aside, not separately, but all of them as one. They are the
same. We have no need to make them different and thus delay the time
when we can hear our Father speak to us. We hear Him now. We come to Him
today.

^12^ With nothing in our hands to which we cling, with lifted hearts and
listening minds we pray:

*^13^ Only salvation can be said to cure.\
Speak to us, Father, that we may be healed.*

^14^ And we will feel salvation cover us with soft protection and with
peace so deep that no illusion can disturb our minds nor offer proof to
us that it is real. This will we learn today. And we will say our prayer
for healing hourly and take a minute as the hour strikes to hear the
answer to our prayer be given us as we attend in silence and in joy.
This is the day when healing comes to us. This is the day when
separation ends and we remember Who we really are.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review IV**](#part0004.html#parta-4) {#part0043_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R4:1^ Now we review again, this time aware we are preparing for the
second part of learning how the truth can be applied. Today we will
begin to concentrate on readiness for what will follow next. Such is our
aim for this review and for the lessons following. Thus we review the
recent lessons and their central thoughts in such a way as will
facilitate the readiness which we would now achieve.

^2^ There is a central theme that unifies each step in the review we
undertake, which can be simply stated in these words:

*^3^ My mind holds only what I think with God.*

^4^ This is a fact and represents the truth of what you are and what
your Father is. It is this thought by which the Father gave creation to
the Son, establishing the Son as co-creator with Himself. It is this
thought which fully guarantees salvation to the Son. For in his mind no
thoughts can dwell but those his Father shares. Lack of forgiveness
blocks this thought from his awareness. Yet it is forever true.

^5^ Let us begin our preparation with some understanding of the many
forms in which the lack of true forgiveness may be carefully concealed.
Because they are illusions, they are not perceived to be but what they
are-defenses which protect your unforgiving thoughts from being seen and
recognized. Their purpose is to show you something else and hold
correction off through self-deceptions made to take its place.

^6^ And yet your mind holds only what you think with God. Your
self-deceptions cannot take the place of truth. No more than can a child
who throws a stick into the ocean change the coming and the going of the
tides, the warming of the water by the sun, the silver of the moon on it
by night. So do we start each practice period in this review with
readying our minds to understand the lessons that we read and see the
meaning which they offer us.

^7^ Begin each day with time devoted to the preparation of your mind to
learn what each idea you will review that day can offer you in freedom
and in peace. Open your mind and clear it of all thoughts that would
deceive, and let this thought alone engage it fully and remove the rest:

*^8^ My mind holds only what I think with God.*

^9^ Five minutes with this thought will be enough to set the day along
the lines which God appointed and to place His Mind in charge of all the
thoughts you will receive that day. They will not come from you alone,
for they will all be shared with Him. And so each one will bring the
message of His Love to you, returning messages of yours to Him. So will
communion with the Lord of Hosts be yours, as He Himself has willed it
be. And as His own completion joins with Him, so will He join with you
who are complete as you unite with Him and He with you.

^10^After your preparation, merely read each of the two ideas assigned
to you to be reviewed that day. Then close your eyes and say them slowly
to yourself. There is no hurry now, for you are using time for its
intended purpose. Let each word shine with the meaning God has given it
as it was given to you through His Voice. Let each idea that you review
that day give you the gift which He has laid in it for you to have of
Him. And we will use no format for our practicing but this:

^11^ Each hour of the day bring to your mind the thought with which the
day began and spend a quiet moment with it. Then repeat the two ideas
you practice for the day unhurriedly, with time enough to see the gifts
which they contain for you, and let them be received where they were
meant to be. We add no other thoughts, but let them be the messages they
are. We need no more than this to give us happiness and rest and endless
quiet, perfect certainty, and all our Father wills that we receive as
the inheritance we have of Him.

^12^ Each day of practicing, as we review, we close as we began,
repeating first the thought that made the day a special time of blessing
and of happiness for us and through our faithfulness restored the world
from darkness to the light, from grief to joy, from pain to peace, from
sin to holiness. God offers thanks to you who practice thus the keeping
of His Word. And as you give your mind to the ideas for the day again
before you sleep, His gratitude surrounds you in the peace wherein He
wills you be forever and are learning now to claim again as your
inheritance.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 141**](#part0004.html#level-410) {#part0043_split_001.html#h1-410 .level1}

\[121\] Forgiveness is the key to happiness.

\[122\] Forgiveness offers everything I want.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 142**](#part0004.html#level-411) {#part0043_split_002.html#h1-411 .level1}

\[123\] I thank my Father for His gifts to me.

\[124\] Let me remember I am one with God.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 143**](#part0004.html#level-412) {#part0043_split_003.html#h1-412 .level1}

\[125\] In quiet I receive God's Word today.

\[126\] All that I give is given to myself.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 144**](#part0004.html#level-413) {#part0043_split_004.html#h1-413 .level1}

\[127\] There is no love but God's.

\[128\] The world I see has nothing that I want.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 145**](#part0004.html#level-414) {#part0043_split_005.html#h1-414 .level1}

\[129\] Beyond this world there is a world I want.

\[130\] It is impossible to see two worlds.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 146**](#part0004.html#level-415) {#part0043_split_006.html#h1-415 .level1}

\[131\] No one can fail who asks to reach the truth.

\[132\] I loose the world from all I thought it was.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 147**](#part0004.html#level-416) {#part0043_split_007.html#h1-416 .level1}

\[133\] I will not value what is valueless.

\[134\] Let me perceive forgiveness as it is.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 148**](#part0004.html#level-417) {#part0043_split_008.html#h1-417 .level1}

\[135\] If I defend myself, I am attacked.

\[136\] Sickness is a defense against the truth.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 149**](#part0004.html#level-418) {#part0043_split_009.html#h1-418 .level1}

\[137\] When I am healed, I am not healed alone.

\[138\] Heaven is the decision I must make.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 150**](#part0004.html#level-419) {#part0043_split_010.html#h1-419 .level1}

\[139\] I will accept Atonement for myself.

\[140\] Only salvation can be said to cure.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 151 All things are echoes of the Voice of God**](#part0004.html#level-420) {#part0043_split_011.html#h1-420 .level1}

^1^ No one can judge on partial evidence. That is not judgment. It is
merely an opinion based on ignorance and doubt. Its seeming certainty is
but a cloak for the uncertainty it would conceal. It needs irrational
defense because it is irrational. And its defense seems strong,
convincing, and without a doubt because of all the doubting underneath.

^2^ You do not seem to doubt the world you see. You do not really
question what is shown you through the body's eyes. Nor do you ask why
you believe it, even though you learned a long while since your senses
do deceive. That you believe them to the last detail which they report
is even stranger when you pause to recollect how frequently they have
been faulty witnesses indeed! Why would you trust them so implicitly?
Why but because of underlying doubt which you would hide with show of
certainty?

^3^ How can you judge? Your judgment rests upon the witness that your
senses offer you. Yet witness never falser was than this. But how else
do you judge the world you see? You place pathetic faith in what your
eyes and ears report. You think your fingers touch reality and close
upon the truth. This is awareness which you understand and think more
real than what is witnessed to by the eternal Voice of God Himself.

^4^ Can this be judgment? You have often been urged to refrain from
judging, not because it is a right to be withheld from you. You cannot
judge. You merely can believe the ego's judgments, all of which are
false. It guides your senses carefully, to prove how weak you are, how
helpless and afraid, how apprehensive of just punishment, how black with
sin, how wretched in your guilt.

^5^ This thing it speaks of and would yet defend it tells you is
yourself. And you believe that this is so with stubborn certainty. Yet
underneath remains the hidden doubt that what it shows you as reality
with such conviction it does not believe. It is itself alone that it
condemns. It is within itself it sees the guilt. It is its own despair
it sees in you.

^6^ Hear not its voice. The witnesses it sends to prove to you its evil
is your own are false and speak with certainty of what they do not know.
Your faith in them is blind because you would not share the doubts their
lord cannot completely vanquish. You believe to doubt his vassals is to
doubt yourself. Yet you must learn to doubt their evidence will clear
the way to recognize yourself and let the Voice for God alone be Judge
of what is worthy of your own belief.

^7^ He will not tell you that your brother should be judged by what your
eyes behold in him, nor what his body's mouth says to your ears, nor
what your fingers' touch reports of him. He passes by such idle
witnesses, which merely bear false witness to God's Son. He recognizes
only what God loves, and in the holy light of what He sees do all the
ego's dreams of what you are vanish before the splendor He beholds.

^8^ Let Him be judge of what you are, for He has certainty in which
there is no doubt, because it rests on certainty so great that doubt is
meaningless before Its face. Christ cannot doubt Himself. The Voice of
God can only honor Him, rejoicing in His perfect, everlasting
sinlessness. Whom He has judged can only laugh at guilt, unwilling now
to play with toys of sin, unheeding of the body's witnesses before the
rapture of His holy face.

^9^ And thus He judges you. Accept His word of what you are, for He
bears witness to your beautiful creation and the Mind Whose Thought
created your reality. What can the body mean to Him Who knows the glory
of the Father and the Son? What whispers of the ego can He hear? What
could convince Him that your sins are real?

^10^ Let Him be judge as well of everything that seems to happen to you
in this world. His lessons will enable you to bridge the gap between
illusions and the truth. He will remove all faith that you have placed
in pain, disaster, suffering, and loss. He gives you vision which can
look beyond these grim appearances and can behold the gentle face of
Christ in all of them. You will no longer doubt that only good can come
to you who are beloved of God, for He will judge all happenings and
teach the single which they all contain.

^11^ He will select the elements in them that represent the truth and
disregard those aspects which reflect but idle dreams. And He will
reinterpret all you see and all occurrences, each circumstance, and
every happening which seems to touch on you in any way from His one
frame of reference, wholly unified and sure. And you will see the love
beyond the hate, the constancy in change, the pure in sin, and only
Heaven's blessing on the world.

^12^ Such is your resurrection, for your life is not a part of anything
you see. It stands beyond the body and the world, past every witness for
unholiness, within the Holy, holy as Itself. In everyone and everything,
His Voice would speak to you of nothing but your Self and your Creator,
Who is one with Him. So will you see the holy face of Christ in
everything and hear in everything no sound except the echo of God's
Voice.

^13^ We practice wordlessly today, except at the beginning of the time
you spend with God. We introduce these times with but a single, slow
repeating of the thought with which the day begins. And then we watch
our thoughts, appealing silently to Him Who sees the elements of truth
in them. Let Him evaluate each thought that comes to mind, remove the
elements of dreams, and give them back to you as clean ideas that do not
contradict the Will of God.

^14^ Give Him your thoughts, and He will give them back as miracles
which joyously proclaim the wholeness and the happiness God wills His
Son as proof of His eternal Love. And as each thought is thus
transformed, it takes on healing power from the Mind Which saw the truth
in it and failed to be deceived by what was falsely added. All the
threads of fantasy are gone, and what remains is unified into a perfect
thought that offers its perfection everywhere.

^15^Spend 15 minutes thus when you awake, and gladly give another 15
more before you go to sleep. Your ministry begins as all your thoughts
are purified. So are you taught to teach the Son of God the holy of his
sanctity. No one can fail to listen when you hear the Voice for God give
honor to God's Son. And everyone will share the thoughts with you which
He has retranslated in your mind.

^16^ Such is your Eastertide. And so you lay the gift of snow-white
lilies on the world, replacing witnesses to sin and death. Through your
transfiguration is the world redeemed and joyfully released from guilt.
Now do we lift our resurrected minds in gladness and in gratitude to Him
Who has restored our sanity to us.

^17^ And we will hourly remember Him Who is salvation and deliverance.
As we give thanks the world unites with us and happily accepts our holy
thoughts which Heaven has corrected and made pure. Now has our ministry
begun at last, to carry round the world the joyous news that truth has
no illusions and the peace of God, through us, belongs to everyone.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 152 The power of decision is my own**](#part0004.html#level-421) {#part0043_split_012.html#h1-421 .level1}

^1^ No one can suffer loss unless it be his own decision. No one suffers
pain except his choice elects this state for him. No one can grieve nor
fear nor think him sick unless these are the outcomes that he wants. And
no one dies without his own consent. Nothing occurs but represents your
wish, and nothing is omitted that you choose. Here is your world,
complete in all details. Here is its whole reality for you. And it is
only here salvation is.

^2^ You may believe that this position is extreme and too inclusive to
be true. Yet can truth have exceptions? If you have the gift of
everything, can loss be real? Can pain be part of peace, or grief of
joy? Can fear and sickness enter in a mind where love and perfect
holiness abide? Truth must be all-inclusive if it be the truth at all.
Accept no opposite and no exceptions, for to do so is to contradict the
truth entirely.

^3^ Salvation is the recognition that the truth is true and nothing else
is true. This you have heard before, but you may not yet accept both
parts of it. Without the first, the second has no meaning, but without
the second is the first no longer true. Truth cannot have an opposite.
This can not be too often said and thought about. For if what is not
true is true as well as what is true, then part of truth is false, and
truth has lost its meaning. Nothing but the truth is true, and what is
false is false.

^4^ This is the simplest of distinctions, yet the most obscure. But not
because it is a difficult distinction to perceive. It is concealed
behind a vast array of choices which do not appear to be entirely your
own. And thus the truth appears to have some aspects that belie
consistency but do not seem to be but contradictions introduced by you.

^5^ As God created you, you must remain unchangeable with transitory
states by definition false. And that includes all shifts in feeling,
alterations in conditions of the body and the mind, in all awareness,
and in all response. This is the all-inclusiveness which sets the truth
apart from falsehood, and the false kept separate from the truth as what
it is.

^6^ Is it not strange that you believe to think you made the world you
see is arrogance? God made it not. Of this you can be sure. What can He
know of the ephemeral, the sinful and the guilty, the afraid, the
suffering and lonely, and the mind that lives within a body that must
die? You but accuse Him of insanity, to think He made a world where such
things seem to have reality. He is not mad. Yet only madness makes a
world like this.

^7^ To think that God made chaos, contradicts His Will, invented
opposites to truth, and suffers death to triumph over life-all this is
arrogance. Humility would see at once these things are not of Him. And
can you see what God created not? To think you can is merely to believe
you can perceive what God willed not to be. And what could be more
arrogant than this?

^8^ Let us today be truly humble and accept what we have made as what it
is. The power of decision is our own. Decide but to accept your rightful
place as co-creator of the universe, and all you think you made will
disappear. What rises to awareness then will be all that there ever was,
eternally as it is now. And it will take the place of self-deceptions
made but to usurp the altar to the Father and the Son.

^9^ Today we practice true humility, abandoning the false pretense by
which the ego seeks to prove it arrogant. Only the ego can be arrogant.
But truth is humble in acknowledging its mightiness, its changelessness,
and its eternal wholeness-all-encompassing, God's perfect gift to His
beloved Son.

^10^ We lay aside the arrogance which says that we are sinners, guilty
and afraid, ashamed of what we are. And we lift our hearts in true
humility instead to Him Who has created us immaculate, like to Himself
in power and in love. The power of decision is our own. And we accept of
Him that which we are and humbly recognize the Son of God.

^11^ To recognize God's Son implies as well that all self-concepts have
been laid aside and recognized as false. Their arrogance has been
perceived. And in humility the radiance of God's Son, his gentleness,
his perfect sinlessness, his Father's Love, his right to Heaven and
release from hell are joyously accepted as our own. Now do we join in
glad acknowledgment that lies are false and only truth is true.

^12^ We think of truth alone as we arise and spend five minutes
practicing its ways, encouraging our frightened minds with this:

*^13^ The power of decision is my own.\
This day I will accept myself as what\
My Father's Will created me to be.*

^14^ Then will we wait in silence, giving up all self-deceptions as we
humbly ask our Self that He reveal Himself to us. And He Who never left
will come again to our awareness, grateful to restore His home to God as
it was meant to be.

^15^ In patience wait for Him throughout the day and hourly invite Him
with the words with which the day began, concluding it with this same
invitation to your Self. God's Voice will answer, for He speaks for you
and for your Father. He will substitute the peace of God for all your
frantic thoughts, the truth of God for self-deceptions, and God's Son
for your illusions of yourself.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 153 In my defenselessness my safety lies**](#part0004.html#level-422) {#part0043_split_013.html#h1-422 .level1}

^1^ You who feel threatened by this changing world, its twists of
fortune and its bitter jests, its brief relationships and all the
"gifts" it merely lends to take away again, attend this well. The world
provides no safety. It is rooted in attack and all its "gifts" of
seeming safety are illusory deceptions. It attacks and then attacks
again. No peace of mind is possible where danger threatens thus.

^2^ The world gives rise but to defensiveness. For threat brings anger,
anger makes attack seem reasonable, honestly provoked, and righteous in
the name of self defense. Yet is defensiveness a double threat. For it
attests to weakness and sets up a system of defense that cannot work.
Now are the weak still further undermined, for there is treachery
without and still a greater treachery within. The mind is now confused
and knows not where to turn to find escape from its imaginings.

^3^ It is as if a circle held it fast, wherein another circle bound it,
and another in that one, until escape no longer can be hoped for nor
obtained. Attack, defense; defense, attack, become the circles of the
hours and the days that bind the mind in heavy bands of steel with iron
overlaid, returning but to start again. There seems to be no break nor
ending in the ever-tightening grip of imprisonment upon the mind.

^4^ Defenses are the costliest of all the prices which the ego would
exact. In them lies madness in a form so grim that hope of sanity seems
but to be an idle dream, beyond the possible. The sense of threat the
world encourages is so much deeper and so far beyond the frenzy and
intensity of which you can conceive that you have no idea of all the
devastation it has wrought. You are its slave. You know not what you do
in fear of it. You do not understand how much you have been made to
sacrifice who feel its iron grip upon your heart.

^5^ You do not realize what you have done to sabotage the holy peace of
God by your defensiveness. For you behold the Son of God as but a victim
to attack by fantasies, by dreams, and by illusions he has made; yet
helpless he is in their presence, needful only of defense by still more
fantasies and dreams by which illusions of his safety comfort him.

^6^ Defenselessness is strength. It testifies to recognition of the
Christ in you. Perhaps you will recall the course maintains that choice
is always made between His strength and your own weakness seen apart
from Him. Defenselessness can never be attacked because it recognizes
strength so great attack is folly or a silly game a tired child might
play when he becomes too sleepy to remember what he wants.

^7^ Defensiveness is weakness. It proclaims you have denied the Christ
and come to fear His Father's anger. What can save you now from your
delusion of an angry god whose fearful image you believe you see at work
in all the evils of the world? What but illusions could defend you now,
when it is but illusions which you fight?

^8^ We will not play such childish games today. For our true purpose is
to save the world, and we would not exchange for foolishness the endless
joy our function offers us. We would not let our happiness slip by
because a fragment of a senseless dream happened to cross our minds, and
we mistook the figures in it for the Son of God, its tiny instant for
eternity.

^9^ We look past dreams today and recognize that we need no defense
because we are created unassailable, without all thought or wish or
dream in which attack has any meaning. Now we cannot fear, for we have
left all fearful thoughts behind. And in defenselessness we stand
secure, serenely certain of our safety now, sure of salvation; sure we
will fulfil our chosen purpose as our ministry extends its holy blessing
through the world.

^10^ Be still a moment, and in silence think how holy is your purpose,
how secure you rest, untouchable within its light. God's ministers have
chosen that the truth be with them. Who is holier than they? Who could
be surer that his happiness is fully guaranteed? And who could be more
mightily protected? What defense could possibly be needed now by those
who are among the chosen ones of God by His election and their own as
well?

^11^ It is the function of God's ministers to help their brothers choose
as they have done. God has elected all, but few have come to realize His
Will is but their own. And while you fail to teach what you have
learned, salvation waits and darkness holds the world in grim
imprisonment. Nor will you learn that light has come to you, and your
escape has been accomplished. For you will not see the light until you
offer it to all your brothers. As they take it from your hands, so will
you recognize it as your own.

^12^ Salvation can be thought of as a game that happy children play. It
was designed by One Who loves His children, and Who would replace their
fearful toys with joyous games which teach them that the game of fear is
gone. His game instructs in happiness because there is no loser.
Everyone who plays must win, and in his winning is the gain to everyone
ensured. The game of fear is gladly laid aside when children come to see
the benefits salvation brings.

^13^ You who have played that you are lost to hope, abandoned by your
Father, left alone in terror in a fearful world made mad by sin and
guilt, be happy now. That game is over. Now a quiet time has come in
which we put away the toys of guilt and lock our quaint and childish
thoughts of sin forever from the pure and holy minds of Heaven's
children and the Son of God. We pause but for a moment more to play our
final happy game upon this earth. And then we go to take our rightful
place where truth abides and games are meaningless.

^14^ So is the story ended. Let this day bring the last chapter closer
to the world that everyone may learn the tales he reads of terrifying
destiny, defeat of all his hopes, his pitiful defense against a
vengeance he can not escape, are but his own deluded fantasies. God's
ministers have come to waken him from the dark dreams this story has
evoked in his confused, bewildered memory of this distorted tale. God's
Son can smile at last on learning that it is not true.

^15^ Today we practice in a form we will maintain for quite a while. We
will begin each day by giving our attention to the daily thought as long
as possible. Five minutes now becomes the least we give to preparation
for a day in which salvation is the only goal we have. Ten would be
better; 15 better still. And as distraction ceases to arise to turn us
from our purpose, we will find that half an hour is too short a time to
spend with God. Nor will we willingly give less at night in gratitude
and joy.

^16^ Each hour adds to our increasing peace, as we remember to be
faithful to the Will we share with God. At times, perhaps, a minute,
even less, will be the most that we can offer as the hour strikes.
Sometimes we will forget. At other times the business of the world will
close on us, and we will be unable to withdraw a little while and turn
our thoughts to God.

^17^ Yet when we can, we will observe our trust as ministers of God in
hourly remembrance of our mission and His Love. And we will quietly sit
by and wait on Him and listen to His Voice and learn what He would have
us do the hour that is yet to come, while thanking Him for all the gifts
He gave us in the one gone by.

^18^ In time, with practice, you will never cease to think of Him and
hear His loving Voice guiding your footsteps into quiet ways where you
will walk in true defenselessness, for you will know that Heaven goes
with you. Nor would you keep your mind away from Him a moment, even
though your time is spent in offering salvation to the world. Think you
He will not make this possible for you who chose to carry out His plan
for the salvation of the world and yours?

^19^ Today our theme is our defenselessness. We clothe ourselves in it
as we prepare to meet the day. We rise up strong in Christ and let our
weakness disappear as we remember that His strength abides in us. We
will remind ourselves that He remains beside us through the day and
never leaves our weakness unsupported by His strength.

^20^ We call upon His strength each time we feel the threat of our
defenses undermine our certainty of purpose. We will pause a moment as
He tells us, "I am here." Your practicing will now begin to take the
earnestness of love to help you keep your mind from wandering from its
intent.

^21^ Be not afraid nor timid. There can be no doubt that you will reach
your final goal. The ministers of God can never fail because the love
and strength and peace that shine from them to all their brothers come
from Him. These are His gifts to you. Defenselessness is all you need to
give Him in return. You lay aside but what was never real to look on
Christ and see His sinlessness.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 154 I am among the ministers of God**](#part0004.html#level-423) {#part0043_split_014.html#h1-423 .level1}

^1^ Let us today be neither arrogant nor falsely humble. We have gone
beyond such foolishness. We cannot judge ourselves, nor need we do so.
These are but attempts to hold decision off, and to delay commitment to
our function. It is not our part to judge our worth, nor can we know
what role is best for us; what we can do within a larger plan we cannot
see in its entirety. Our part is cast in Heaven, not in hell. And what
we think is weakness can be strength; what we believe to be our strength
is often arrogance.

^2^ Whatever your appointed role may be, it was selected by the Voice
for God, Whose function is to speak for you as well. Seeing your
strengths exactly as they are and equally aware of where they can be
best applied, for what, to whom, and when, He chooses and accepts your
part for you. He does not work without your own consent, but He is not
deceived in what you are and listens only to His Voice in you.

^3^ It is through His ability to hear One Voice Which is His own that
you become aware at last there is One Voice in you. And that One Voice
appoints your function and relays it to you, giving you the strength to
understand it, do what it entails, and to succeed in everything you do
that is related to it. God has joined His Son in this, and thus His Son
becomes His messenger of unity with Him.

^4^ It is this joining through the Voice of God of Father and of Son
that sets apart salvation from the world. It is this Voice which speaks
of laws the world does not obey, which promises salvation from all sin,
with guilt abolished in the mind that God created sinless. Now this mind
becomes aware again of Who created it, and of His lasting union with
itself. So is its Self the one reality in which its will and that of God
are joined.

^5^ A messenger does not elect to make the message he delivers. Nor does
he question the right of him who does nor ask why he has chosen those
who will receive the message that he brings. It is enough that he accept
it, bring it to the ones for whom it is appointed, and fulfill his role
in its delivery. If he insists on judging what the messages should be or
what their purpose is or where they should be carried, he is failing to
perform his proper part as bringer of the Word.

^6^ There is one major difference in the role of Heaven's messengers
which sets them off from those the world appoints. The messages which
they deliver are intended first for them. And it is only as they can
accept them for themselves that they become able to bring them further
and to give them everywhere that they were meant to be. Like earthly
messengers, they did not write the messages they bear, but they become
their first receivers in the truest sense, receiving to prepare
themselves to give.

^7^ An earthly messenger fulfills his role by giving all the messages
away. The messengers of God perform their part by their acceptance of
His messages as for themselves and show they understand the messages by
giving them away. They choose no roles that are not given them by His
authority. And so they gain by every message which they give away.

^8^ Would you receive the messages of God? For thus do you become His
messengers. You are appointed now. And yet you wait to give the messages
you have received, and so you do not know that they are yours and do not
recognize them. No one can receive and understand he has received until
he gives. For in the giving is his own acceptance of what he received.

^9^ You who are now the messengers of God receive His messages, for that
is part of your appointed role. God has not failed to offer what you
need, nor has it been left unaccepted. Yet another part of your
appointed task is yet to be accomplished. He Who has received for you
the messages of God would have them be received by you as well. For thus
do you identify with Him and claim your own.

^10^ It is this joining that we undertake to recognize today. We will
not seek to keep our minds apart from Him Who speaks for us, for it is
but our voice we hear as we attend Him. He alone can speak to us and for
us, joining in One Voice the getting and the giving of God's Word, the
giving and receiving of His Will.

^11^ We practice giving Him what He would have that we may recognize His
gifts to us. He needs our voice that He may speak through us. He needs
our hands to hold His messages and carry them to those whom He appoints.
He needs our feet to bring us where He wills, that those who wait in
misery may be at last delivered. And He needs our will united with His
own, that we may be the true receivers of the gifts He gives.

^12^ Let us but learn this for today: we will not recognize what we
receive until we give it. You have heard this said a hundred times, and
yet belief is lacking still. But this is sure-until belief is given it,
you will receive a thousand miracles and then receive a thousand more
but will not know that God Himself has left no gift beyond what you
already have nor has denied the tiniest of blessings to His Son. What
can this mean to you until you have identified with him and with his
own?

^13^ Our for today is stated thus:

*^14^ I am among the ministers of God,\
And I am grateful that I have the means\
By which to recognize that I am free.*

^15^ The world recedes as we light up our minds and realize these holy
words are true. They are the message sent to us today from our Creator.
Now we demonstrate how they have changed our minds about ourselves and
what our function is. For as we prove that we accept no will we do not
share, our many gifts from our Creator will spring to our sight and leap
into our hands, and we will recognize what we received.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 155 I will step back and let Him lead the way**](#part0004.html#level-424) {#part0043_split_015.html#h1-424 .level1}

^1^ There is a way of living in the world that is not here, although it
seems to be. You do not change appearance, though you smile more
frequently. Your forehead is serene; your eyes are quiet. And the ones
who walk the world as you do recognize their own. Yet those who have not
yet perceived the way will recognize you also and believe that you are
like them as you were before.

^2^ The world is an illusion. Those who choose to come to it are seeking
for a place where they can be illusions and avoid their own reality. Yet
when they find their own reality is even here, then they step back and
let it lead the way. What other choice is really theirs to make? To let
illusion walk ahead of truth is madness, but to let illusion sink behind
the truth and let the truth stand forth as what it is, is simple sanity.

^3^This is the simple choice we make today. The mad illusion will remain
awhile in evidence for those to look upon who chose to come and have not
yet rejoiced to find they were mistaken in the choice. They cannot learn
directly from the truth, because they have denied that it is so. And so
they need a teacher who perceives their madness, but who still can look
beyond illusion to the simple truth in them.

^4^ If truth demanded they give up the world, it would appear to them as
if it asked the sacrifice of something that is real. Many have chosen to
renounce the world while still believing its reality, and they have
suffered from a sense of loss and have not been released accordingly.
Others have chosen nothing but the world, and they have suffered from a
sense of loss still deeper, which they did not understand.

^5^ Between these paths there is another road that leads away from loss
of every kind, for sacrifice and deprivation both are quickly left
behind. This is the way appointed for you now. You walk this path as
others walk, nor do you seem to be distinct from them although you are
indeed. Thus can you serve them while you serve yourself and set their
footsteps on the way which God has opened up to you, and them through
you.

^6^ Illusion still appears to cling to you that you may reach them. Yet
it has stepped back, and it is not illusion that they hear you speak of
nor illusion which you bring their eyes to look on and their minds to
grasp. Now can the truth, which walks ahead of you, speak to them
through illusion, for the road leads past illusion now, while on the way
you call to them that they may follow you.

^7^All roads will lead to this one in the end. For sacrifice and
deprivation are paths which lead nowhere, choices for defeat, and aims
which will remain impossible. All this steps back as truth comes forth
in you to lead your brothers from the ways of death and set them on the
way to happiness. Their suffering is but illusion. Yet they need a guide
to lead them out of it, for they mistake illusion for the truth.

^8^ Such is salvation's call, and nothing more. It asks that you accept
the truth, and let it go before you, lighting up the path of ransom from
illusion. It is not a ransom with a price. There is no cost, but only
gain. Illusion can but seem to hold in chains the holy Son of God. It is
but from illusions he is saved. As they step back, he finds himself
again.

^9^Walk safely now, yet carefully, because this path is new to you. And
you may find that you are tempted still to walk ahead of truth and let
illusions be your guide. Your holy brothers have been given you to
follow in your footsteps as you walk with certainty of purpose to the
truth. It goes before you now, that they may see something with which
they can identify, something they understand to lead the way.

^10^ Yet at the journey's ending there will be no gap, no distance
between truth and you. And all illusions walking in the way you
travelled will be gone from you as well, with nothing left to keep the
truth apart from God's completion, holy as Himself. Step back in faith,
and let truth lead the way. You know not where you go, but One Who knows
goes with you. Let Him lead you with the rest.

^11^ When dreams are over, time has closed the door on all the things
that pass, and miracles are purposeless, the holy Son of God will make
no journeys. There will be no wish to be illusion rather than the truth.
And we step forth toward this as we progress along the way that truth
points out to us. This is our final journey, which we make for everyone.
We must not lose our way. For as truth goes before us, so it goes before
our brothers who will follow us.

^12^ We walk to God. Pause and reflect on this. Could any way be holier
or more deserving of your effort, of your love, and of your full intent?
What way could give you more than everything or offer less and still
content the holy Son of God? We walk to God. The truth that walks before
us now is one with Him and leads us to where He has always been. What
way but this could be a path that you would choose instead?

^13^ Your feet are safely set upon the road which leads the world to
God. Look not to ways that seem to lead you elsewhere. Dreams are not a
worthy guide for you who are God's Son. Forget not He has placed His
hand in yours and given you your brothers in His trust that you are
worthy of His trust in you. He cannot be deceived. His trust has made
your pathway certain and your goal secure. You will not fail your
brothers nor your Self.

^14^ And now He asks but that you think of Him a while each day that He
may speak to you and tell you of His Love, reminding you how great His
trust, how limitless His Love. In your name and His own, which are the
same, we practice gladly with this thought today:

*^15^ I will step back and let Him lead the way,\
For I would walk along the road to Him.*
:::

[]{#part0043_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 156 I walk with God in perfect holiness**](#part0004.html#level-425) {#part0043_split_016.html#h1-425 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea but states the simple truth that makes the thought of
sin impossible. It promises there is no cause for guilt, and being
causeless it does not exist. It follows surely from the basic thought so
often mentioned in the text-ideas leave not their source. If this be
true, how can you be apart from God? How could you walk the world alone
and separate from your Source?

^2^ We are not inconsistent in the thoughts that we present in our
curriculum. Truth must be true throughout if it be true. It cannot
contradict itself nor be in parts uncertain and in others sure. You
cannot walk the world apart from God because you could not be without
Him. He is what your life is. Where you are, He is. There is one Life.
That Life you share with Him. Nothing can be apart from Him and live.

^3^ Yet where He is there must be holiness as well as life. No attribute
of His remains unshared by everything that lives. What lives is holy as
Himself because what shares His life is part of Holiness and could no
more be sinful than the sun could choose to be of ice, the sea elect to
be apart from water, or the grass to grow with roots suspended in the
air.

^4^ There is a Light in you Which cannot die, Whose Presence is so holy
that the world is sanctified because of you. All things that live bring
gifts to you and offer them in gratitude and gladness at your feet. The
scent of flowers is their gift to you. The waves bow down before you,
and the trees extend their arms to shield you from the heat and lay
their leaves before you on the ground that you may walk in softness,
while the wind sinks to a whisper round your holy head.

^5^ The Light in you is what the universe longs to behold. All living
things are still before you, for they recognize Who walks with you. The
light you carry is their own, and thus they see in you their holiness,
saluting you as savior and as God. Accept their reverence, for it is due
to Holiness itself Which walks with you, transforming in Its gentle
Light all things into Its likeness and Its purity.

^6^ This is the way salvation works. As you step back, the Light in you
steps forward and encompasses the world. It heralds not the end of sin
in punishment and death. In lightness and in laughter is it gone,
because its quaint absurdity is seen. It is a foolish thought, a silly
dream, not frightening, ridiculous perhaps, but who would waste an
instant in approach to God Himself for such a senseless whim?

^7^ Yet you have wasted many, many years on just this foolish thought.
The past is gone with all its fantasies. They keep you bound no longer.
The approach to God is near. And in the little interval of doubt which
still remains, you may perhaps lose sight of your Companion, and mistake
Him for the senseless, ancient dream that now is past.

^8"^ Who walks with me?" This question should be asked a thousand times
a day, till certainty has ended doubting and established peace. Today
let doubting cease. God speaks for you in answering your question with
these words:

*^9^ I walk with God in perfect holiness.\
I light the world, I light my mind and all\
The minds which God created one with me.*
:::

[]{#part0043_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 157 Into His Presence would I enter now**](#part0004.html#level-426) {#part0043_split_017.html#h1-426 .level1}

^1^ This is a day of silence and of trust. It is a special time of
promise in your calendar of days. It is a time Heaven has set apart to
shine upon, and cast a timeless light upon this day when echoes of
eternity are heard. This day is holy, for it ushers in a new experience,
a different kind of feeling and awareness. You have spent long days and
nights in celebrating death. Today you learn to feel the joy of life.

^2^ This is another crucial turning point in the curriculum. We add a
new dimension now-a fresh experience that sheds a light on all that we
have learned already and prepares us for what we have yet to learn. It
brings us to the door where learning ceases, and we catch a glimpse of
what lies past the highest reaches it can possibly attain. It leaves us
there an instant and we go beyond it, sure of our direction and our only
goal.

^3^ Today it will be given you to feel a touch of Heaven, though you
will return to paths of learning. Yet you have come far enough along the
way to alter time sufficiently to rise above its laws and walk into
eternity a while. This you will learn to do increasingly, as every ,
faithfully rehearsed, brings you more swiftly to this holy place and
leaves you for a moment to your Self.

^4^ He will direct your practicing today, for what you ask for now is
what He wills. And having joined your will with His this day, what you
are asking must be given you. Nothing is needed but today's idea to
light your mind and let it rest in still anticipation and in quiet joy
wherein you quickly leave the world behind.

^5^ From this day forth, your ministry takes on a genuine devotion and a
glow that travels from your fingertips to those you touch and blesses
those you look upon. A vision reaches everyone you meet, and everyone
you think of, or who thinks of you. For your experience today will so
transform your mind that it becomes the touchstone for the holy Thoughts
of God.

^6^ Your body will be sanctified today, its only purpose being now to
bring the vision of what you experience this day to light the world. We
cannot give experience like this directly. Yet it leaves a vision in our
eyes which we can offer everyone that he may come the sooner to the same
experience in which the world is quietly forgot and Heaven is remembered
for a while.

^7^ As this experience increases and all goals but this become of little
worth, the world to which you will return becomes a little closer to the
end of time, a little more like Heaven in its ways, a little nearer its
deliverance. And you who bring it light will come to see the light more
sure, the vision more distinct.

^8^ The time will come when you will not return in the same form in
which you now appear, for you will have no need of it. Yet now it has a
purpose and will serve it well. Today we will embark upon a course you
have not dreamed of. But the Holy One, the Giver of the happy dreams of
life, Translator of perception into truth, the holy Guide to Heaven
given you has dreamed for you this journey which you make and start
today with the experience this day holds out to you to be your own.

^9^ Into Christ's Presence will we enter now, serenely unaware of
everything except His shining face and perfect Love. The vision of His
face will stay with you, but there will be an instant which transcends
all vision, even this, the holiest. This you will never teach, for you
attained it not through learning. Yet the vision speaks of your
remembrance of what you knew that instant and will surely know again.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 158 Today I learn to give as I receive**](#part0004.html#level-427) {#part0043_split_018.html#h1-427 .level1}

^1^ What has been given you? The knowledge that you are a mind, in Mind
and purely mind, sinless forever, wholly unafraid because you were
created out of Love. Nor have you left your Source, remaining as you
were created. This was given you as knowledge which you cannot lose. It
was given as well to every living thing, for by that knowledge only does
it live.

^2^ You have received all this. No one who walks the world but has
received it. It is not this knowledge which you give, for that is what
creation gave. All this cannot be learned. What, then, are you to learn
to give today? Our yesterday evoked a theme found early in the text.
Experience cannot be shared directly in the way that vision can. The
revelation that the Father and the Son are one will come in time to
every mind. Yet is that time determined by the mind itself, not taught.

^3^ The time is set already. It appears to be quite arbitrary. Yet there
is no step along the road that anyone takes but by chance. It has
already been taken by him, although he has not yet embarked on it. For
time but seems to go in one direction. We but undertake a journey that
is over. Yet it seems to have a future still unknown to us.

^4^ Time is a trick-a sleight of hand, a vast illusion in which figures
come and go as if by magic. Yet there is a plan behind appearances which
does not change. The script is written. When experience will come to end
your doubting has been set. For we but see the journey from the point at
which it ended, looking back on it, imagining we make it once again;
reviewing mentally what has gone by.

^5^ A teacher does not give experience because he did not learn it. It
revealed itself to him at its appointed time. But vision is his gift.
This he can give directly, for Christ's knowledge is not lost because He
has a vision He can give to anyone who asks. The Father's Will and His
are joined in knowledge. Yet there is a vision which the Holy Spirit
sees because the mind of Christ beholds it too.

^6^Here is the joining of the world of doubt and shadows made with the
intangible. Here is a quiet place within the world made holy by
forgiveness and by love. Here are all contradictions reconciled, for
here the journey ends. Experience, unlearned, untaught, unseen, is
merely there. This is beyond our goal, for it transcends what needs to
be accomplished. Our concern is with Christ's vision. This we can
attain.

^7^ Christ's vision has one law. It does not look upon a body and
mistake it for the Son whom God created. It beholds a light beyond the
body, an idea beyond what can be touched, a purity undimmed by errors,
pitiful mistakes, and fearful thoughts of guilt from dreams of sin. It
sees no separation. And it looks on everyone, on every circumstance, all
happenings, and all events without the slightest fading of the light it
sees.

^8^ This can be taught and must be taught by all who would achieve it.
It requires but the recognition that the world cannot give anything that
faintly can compare with this in value; nor set up a goal which does not
merely disappear when this has been perceived. And this you give
today-see no one as a body. Greet him as the Son of God he is,
acknowledging that he is one with you in holiness.

^9^ Thus are his sins forgiven him, for Christ has vision which has
power to overlook them all. In His forgiveness, they are gone. Unseen by
One, they merely disappear because a vision of the holiness which lies
beyond them comes to take their place. It matters not what form they
took nor how enormous they appeared to be nor who seemed to be hurt by
them. They are no more, and all effects they seemed to have are gone
with them, undone and never to be done.

^10^Thus do you learn to give as you receive. And thus Christ's vision
looks on you as well. This is not difficult to learn if you remember in
your brother you but see yourself. If he be lost in sin so must you be;
if you see light in him your sins have been forgiven by yourself. Each
brother whom you meet today provides another chance to let Christ's
vision shine on you and offer you the peace of God.

^11^ It matters not when revelation comes, for that is not of time. Yet
time has still one gift to give in which true knowledge is reflected in
a way so accurate its image shares its unseen holiness; its likeness
shines with its immortal love. We practice seeing with the eyes of
Christ today. And by the holy gifts we give, Christ's vision looks upon
ourselves as well.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 159 I give the miracles I have received**](#part0004.html#level-428) {#part0043_split_019.html#h1-428 .level1}

^1^ No one can give what he has not received. To give a thing requires
first you have it in your own possession. Here the laws of Heaven and
the world agree. But here they also separate. The world believes that to
possess a thing, it must be kept. Salvation teaches otherwise. To give
is how to recognize you have received. It is the proof that what you
have is yours.

^2^ You understand that you are healed when you give healing. You accept
forgiveness as accomplished in yourself when you forgive. You recognize
your brother as yourself and thus do you perceive that you are whole.
There is no miracle you cannot give, for all are given you. Receive them
now by opening the storehouse of your mind where they are laid and
giving them away.

^3^ Christ's vision is a miracle. It comes from far beyond itself, for
it reflects eternal love and the rebirth of love which never died but
has been kept obscure. Christ's vision pictures Heaven, for it sees a
world so like to Heaven that what God created perfect can be mirrored
there. The darkened glass the world presents can show but twisted images
in broken parts. The real world pictures Heaven's innocence.

^4^ Christ's vision is the miracle in which all miracles are born. It is
their source, remaining with each miracle you give and yet remaining
yours. It is the bond by which the giver and receiver are united in
extension here on earth as they are one in Heaven. Christ beholds no sin
in anyone, and in His sight the sinless are as one. Their holiness was
given by His Father and Himself.

^5^ Christ's vision is the bridge between the worlds. And in its power
can you safely trust to carry you from this world into one made holy by
forgiveness. Things which seem quite solid here are merely shadows
there, transparent, faintly seen, at times forgot, and never able to
obscure the light that shines beyond them. Holiness has been restored to
vision, and the blind can see.

^6^ This is the Holy Spirit's single gift-the treasure house to which
you can appeal with perfect certainty for everything that can contribute
to your happiness. All are laid here already. All can be received but
for the asking. Here the door is never locked, and no one is denied his
least request or his most urgent need. There is no sickness not already
healed, no lack unsatisfied, no need unmet within this golden treasury
of Christ.

^7^ Here does the world remember what was lost when it was made. For
here it is repaired, made new again but in a different light. What was
to be the home of sin becomes the center of redemption and the hearth of
mercy where the suffering are healed and welcome. No one will be turned
away from this new home where his salvation waits. No one is stranger to
him. No one asks for anything of him except the gift of his acceptance
of his welcoming.

^8^ Christ's vision is the holy ground in which the lilies of
forgiveness set their roots. This is their home. They can be brought
from here back to the world, but they can never grow in its unnourishing
and shallow soil. They need the light and warmth and kindly care
Christ's charity provides. They need the love with which He looks on
them. And they become His messengers who give as they received.

^9^ Take from His storehouse that its treasures may increase. His lilies
do not leave their home when they are carried back into the world. Their
roots remain. They do not leave their source, but carry its beneficence
with them and turn the world into a garden like the one they came from
and to which they go again with added fragrance. Now are they twice
blessed. The messages they brought from Christ have been delivered and
returned to them. And they return them gladly unto Him.

^10^ Behold the store of miracles set out for you to give. Are you not
worth the gift when God appointed it be given you? Judge not God's Son,
but follow in the way He has established. Christ has dreamed the dream
of a forgiven world. It is His gift whereby a sweet transition can be
made from death to life, from hopelessness to hope. Let us an instant
dream with Him. His dream awakens us to truth. His vision gives the
means for a return to our unlost and everlasting sanctity in God.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 160 I am at home. Fear is the stranger here**](#part0004.html#level-429) {#part0043_split_020.html#h1-429 .level1}

^1^ Fear is a stranger to the ways of love. Identify with fear, and you
will be a stranger to yourself. And thus you are unknown to you. What is
your Self remains an alien to the part of you which thinks that it is
real but different from yourself. Who could be sane in such a
circumstance? Who but a madman could believe he is what he is not and
judge against himself?

^2^ There is a stranger in our midst who comes from an idea so foreign
to the truth he speaks a different language, looks upon a world truth
does not know, and understands what truth regards as senseless. Stranger
yet, he does not recognize to whom he comes and yet maintains his home
belongs to him, while he is alien now who is at home.

^3^And yet how easy it would be to say, "This is my home. Here I belong
and will not leave because a madman says I must." What reason is there
for not saying this? What could the reason be except that you had asked
this stranger in to take your place and let you be a stranger to
yourself? No one would let himself be dispossessed so needlessly unless
he thought there was another home more suited to his tastes.

^4^ Who is the stranger? Is it fear or you that is unsuited to the home
which God provided for His Son? Is fear His own, created in His
likeness? Is it fear that love completes and is completed by? There is
no home can shelter love and fear. They cannot coexist. If you are real,
then fear must be illusion. And if fear is real, then you do not exist
at all.

^5^ How simply, then, the question is resolved. Who fears has but denied
himself and said, "I am the stranger here. And so I leave my home to one
more like me than myself and give him all I thought belonged to me." Now
is he exiled of necessity, not knowing who he is, uncertain of all
things but this-that he is not himself and that his home has been denied
to him.

^6^ What does he search for now? What can he find? A stranger to himself
can find no home wherever he may look, for he has made return
impossible. His way is lost except a miracle will search him out and
show him that he is no stranger now. The miracle will come. For in his
home his Self remains. It asked no stranger in and took no alien thought
to be Itself. And It will call its own unto Itself, in recognition of
what is Its own.

^7^ Who is the stranger? Is he not the one your Self calls not? You are
unable now to recognize this stranger in your midst, for you have given
him your rightful place. Yet is your Self as certain of Its own as God
is of His Son. He cannot be confused about creation. He is sure of what
belongs to Him. No stranger can be interposed between His knowledge and
His Son's reality. He does not know of strangers. He is certain of His
Son.

^8^ God's certainty suffices. Who He knows to be His Son belongs where
He has set His Son forever. He has answered you who ask, "Who is the
stranger?" Hear His Voice assure you, quietly and sure, that you are not
a stranger to your Father, nor is your Creator stranger made to you.
Whom God has joined remains forever one, at home in Him, no stranger to
Himself.

^9^Today we offer thanks that Christ has come to search the world for
what belongs to Him. His vision sees no strangers, but beholds His own
and joyously unites with them. They see Him as a stranger, for they do
not recognize themselves. Yet as they give Him welcome, they remember.
And He leads them gently home again where they belong.

^10^Not one does Christ forget. Not one He fails to give you to remember
that your home may be complete and perfect as it was established. He has
not forgotten you. But you will not remember Him until you look on all
as He does. Who denies his brother is denying Him and thus refusing to
accept the gift of sight by which his Self is clearly recognized, his
home remembered, and salvation come.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 161 Give me your blessing, holy Son of God**](#part0004.html#level-430) {#part0043_split_021.html#h1-430 .level1}

^1^ Today we practice differently and take a stand against our anger
that our fears may disappear and offer room to love. Here is salvation
in the simple words in which we practice today's idea. Here is the
answer to temptation which can never fail to welcome in the Christ where
fear and anger had prevailed before. Here is Atonement made complete,
the world passed safely by, and Heaven now restored. Here is the answer
of the Voice of God.

^2^ Complete abstraction is the natural condition of the mind. But part
of it is now unnatural. It does not look on everything as one. It sees
instead but fragments of the whole, for only thus could it invent the
partial world you see. The purpose of all seeing is to show you what you
wish to see. All hearing but brings to your mind the sounds it wants to
hear.

^3^ Thus were specifics made. And now it is specifics we must use in
practicing. We give them to the Holy Spirit that He may employ them for
a purpose which is different from the one we gave to them. Yet He can
use but what we made to teach us from a different point of view, so we
can see a different use in everything.

^4^ One brother is all brothers. Every mind contains all minds, for
every mind is one. Such is the truth. Yet do these thoughts make clear
the meaning of creation? Do these words bring perfect clarity with them
to you? What can they seem to be but empty sounds, pretty, perhaps;
correct in sentiment, yet fundamentally not understood nor
understandable. The mind that taught itself to think specifically can no
longer grasp abstraction in the sense that it is all-encompassing. We
need to see a little that we learn a lot.

^5^ It seems to be the body that we feel limits our freedom, makes us
suffer, and at last puts out our life. Yet bodies are but concrete
symbols of a concrete form of fear. Fear without symbols calls for no
response, for symbols can stand for the meanings. Love needs no symbols,
being true. But fear attaches to specifics, being false.

^6^ Bodies attack but minds do not. This thought is surely reminiscent
of our text, where it is often emphasized. This is the reason bodies
easily become fear's symbols. You have many times been urged to look
beyond the body, for its sight presents the symbol of love's "enemy"
Christ's vision does not see. The body is the target for attack, for no
one thinks he hates a mind. Yet what but mind directs the body to
attack? What else could be the seat of fear except what thinks of fear?

^7^ Hate is specific. There must be a thing to be attacked. An enemy
must be perceived in such a form he can be touched and seen and heard
and ultimately killed. When hatred rests upon a thing, it calls for
death as surely as God's Voice proclaims there is no death. Fear is
insatiable, consuming everything its eyes behold, seeing itself in
everything, compelled to turn upon itself and to destroy.

^8^ Who sees a brother as a body sees him as fear's symbol. And he will
attack because what he beholds is his own fear external to himself,
poised to attack and howling to unite with him again. Mistake not the
intensity of rage projected fear must spawn. It shrieks in wrath and
claws the air in frantic hope it can reach to its maker and devour him.

^9^ This do the body's eyes behold in one whom Heaven cherishes, the
angels love, and God created perfect. This is his reality. And in
Christ's vision is his loveliness reflected in a form so holy and so
beautiful that you could scarce refrain from kneeling at his feet. Yet
you will take his hand instead, for you are like him in the sight that
sees him thus.

^10^ Attack on him is enemy to you, for you will not perceive that in
his hands is your salvation. Ask him but for this, and he will give it
to you. Ask him not to symbolize your fear. Would you request that love
destroy itself? Or would you have it be revealed to you and set you
free?

^11^ Today we practice in a form we have attempted earlier. Your
readiness is closer now, and you will come today nearer Christ's vision.
If you are intent on reaching it, you will succeed today. And once you
have succeeded, you will not be willing to accept the witnesses your
body's eyes call forth. What you will see will sing to you of ancient
melodies you will remember. You are not forgot in Heaven. Would you not
remember it?

^12^ Select one brother, symbol of the rest, and ask salvation of him.
See him first as clearly as you can in that same form to which you are
accustomed. See his face, his hands and feet, his clothing. Watch him
smile, and see familiar gestures which he makes so frequently. Then
think of this-what you are seeing now conceals from you the sight of one
who can forgive you all your sins, whose sacred hands can take the nails
which pierce your own away and lift the crown of thorns which you have
placed upon your bleeding head.

^13^ Ask this of him that he may set you free:

*^14^ Give me your blessing, holy Son of God.\
I would behold you with the eyes of Christ,\
And see my perfect sinlessness in you..*

^15^ And He will answer Whom you called upon, for He will hear the Voice
of God in you and answer in your own. Behold him now whom you had seen
as merely flesh and bone and recognize that Christ has come to you.

^16^ Today's idea is your safe escape from anger and from fear. Be sure
you use it instantly, should you be tempted to attack a brother and
perceive in him the symbol of your fear. And you will see him suddenly
transformed from enemy to savior, from the devil into Christ.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 162 I am as God created me**](#part0004.html#level-431) {#part0043_split_022.html#h1-431 .level1}

^1^ This single thought, held firmly in the mind, would save the world.
From time to time we will repeat it, as we reach another stage in
learning. It will mean far more to you as you advance. These words are
sacred, for they are the words God gave in answer to the world you made.
By them it disappears, and all things seen within its misty clouds and
vaporous illusions vanish as these words are spoken. For they come from
God.

^2^ Here is the Word by which the Son became His Father's happiness, His
Love, and His completion. Here creation is proclaimed and honored as it
is. There is no dream these words will not dispel, no thought of sin,
and no illusion that the dream contains that will not fade away before
their might. They are the trumpet of awakening that sounds around the
world. The dead awake in answer to its call. And those who live and hear
this sound will never look on death.

^3^ Holy indeed is he who makes these words his own-arising with them in
his mind, recalling them throughout the day, at night bringing them with
him as he goes to sleep. His dreams are happy and his rest secure, his
safety certain and his body healed because he sleeps and wakens with the
truth before him always. He will save the world because he gives the
world what he receives each time he practices the words of truth.

^4^ Today we practice simply. For the words we use are mighty, and they
need no thoughts beyond themselves to change the mind of him who uses
them. So wholly is it changed that it is now the treasury in which God
places all His gifts and all His Love to be distributed to all the
world, increased in giving, kept complete because its sharing is
unlimited. And thus you learn to think with God. Christ's vision has
restored your sight by salvaging your mind.

^5^ We honor you today. Yours is the right to perfect holiness you now
accept. With this acceptance is salvation brought to everyone, for who
could cherish sin when holiness like this has blessed the world? Who
could despair when perfect joy is yours, available to all as remedy for
grief and misery, all sense of loss, and for complete escape from sin
and guilt?

^6^ And who would not be brother to you now-you, his redeemer and his
savior. Who could fail to welcome you into his heart with loving
invitation, eager to unite with one like him in holiness? You are as God
created you. These words dispel the night, and darkness is no more. The
light is come today to bless the world, for you have recognized the Son
of God, and in your recognition is the world's.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 163 There is no death. The Son of God is free**](#part0004.html#level-432) {#part0043_split_023.html#h1-432 .level1}

^1^ Death is a thought which takes on many forms, often unrecognized. It
may appear as sadness, fear, anxiety, or doubt; as anger, faithlessness,
and lack of trust; concern for bodies, envy, and all forms in which the
wish to be as you are not may come to tempt you. All such thoughts are
but reflections of the worshipping of death as savior and as giver of
release.

^2^ Embodiment of fear, the host of sin, god of the guilty, and the lord
of all illusions and deceptions, does the thought of death seem mighty.
For it seems to hold all living things within its withered hand; all
hopes and wishes in its blighting grasp. All goals perceived but in its
sightless eyes. The frail, the helpless, and the sick bow down before
its image, thinking it alone is real, inevitable, worthy of their trust.
For it alone will surely come.

^3^ All things but death are seen to be unsure, too quickly lost however
hard to gain, uncertain in their outcome, apt to fail the hopes they
once engendered and to leave the taste of dust and ashes in their wake
in place of aspirations and of dreams. But death is counted on. For it
will come with certain footsteps when the time has come for its arrival.
It will never fail to take all life as hostage to itself.

^4^ Would you bow down to idols such as this? Here is the strength and
might of God Himself perceived within an idol made of dust. Here is the
opposite of God proclaimed as lord of all creation, stronger than God's
Will for life, the endlessness of love and Heaven's perfect, changeless
constancy. Here is the Will of Father and of Son defeated finally and
laid to rest beneath the headstone death has placed upon the body of the
holy Son of God.

^5^ Unholy in defeat, he has become what death would have him be. His
epitaph, which death itself has written, gives no name to him, for he
has passed to dust. It says but this: "Here lies a witness God is dead."
And this it writes again and still again, while all the while its
worshippers agree, and kneeling down with foreheads to the ground, they
whisper fearfully that it is so.

^6^ It is impossible to worship death in any form and still select a few
you would not cherish and would yet avoid while still believing in the
rest. For death is total. Either all things die or else they live and
cannot die. No compromise is possible. For here again we see an obvious
position which we must accept if we be sane; what contradicts one
thought entirely can not be true unless its opposite is proven false.

^7^ The idea of the death of God is so preposterous that even the insane
have difficulty in believing it. For it implies that God was once alive
and somehow perished, killed, apparently, by those who did not want him
to survive. Their stronger will could triumph over His, and so eternal
life gave way to death. And with the Father died the Son as well.

^8^ Death's worshippers may be afraid. And yet can thoughts like these
be fearful? If they saw that it is only this which they believed, they
would be instantly released. And you will show them this today. There is
no death, and we renounce it now in every form for their salvation and
our own as well. God made not death. Whatever form it takes must
therefore be illusion. This the stand we take today. And it is given us
to look past death and see the light beyond.

^9^ Our Father, bless our eyes today. We are Your messengers, and we
would look upon the glorious reflection of Your Love which shines in
everything. We live and breathe in You alone. We are not separate from
Your eternal life. There is no death, for death is not Your Will. And we
abide where You have placed us, in the Life we share with You and with
all living things, to be like You and part of You forever. We accept
Your Thoughts as ours, and our will is one with Yours eternally. Amen.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 164 Now are we one with Him Who is our Source**](#part0004.html#level-433) {#part0043_split_024.html#h1-433 .level1}

^1^ What time but now can truth be recognized? The present is the only
time there is. And so today, this instant, now, we come to look upon
what is forever there-not in our sight, but in the eyes of Christ. He
looks past time and sees eternity as represented there. He hears the
sounds the senseless busy world engenders, yet He hears them faintly,
for beyond them all He hears the song of Heaven and the Voice of God
more clear, more meaningful, more near.

^2^ The world fades easily away before His sight. Its sounds grow dim. A
melody from far beyond the world increasingly is more and more
distinct-an ancient call to which He gives an ancient answer. You will
recognize them both. For they are but your answer to your Father's call
to you. Christ answers for you, echoing your Self, using your voice to
give His glad consent, accepting your deliverance for you.

^3^ How holy is your practicing today, as Christ gives you His sight and
hears for you and answers in your name the call He hears. How quiet is
the time you give to spend with Him beyond the world. How easily are all
your seeming sins forgot and all your sorrows unremembered. On this day
is grief laid by, for sights and sounds which come from nearer than the
world are made clear to you who will today accept the gifts He gives.

^4^ There is a silence into which the world can not intrude. There is an
ancient peace you carry in your heart and have not lost. There is a
sense of holiness in you the thought of sin has never touched. All this
today you will remember. Faithfulness in practicing today will bring
rewards so great and so completely different from all things you sought
before that you will know that here your treasure is and here your rest.

^5^ This is the day when vain imaginings part like a curtain to reveal
what lies beyond them. Now is what is really there made visible, while
all the shadows which appeared to hide it sink to obscurity. Now is the
balance righted and the scales of judgment left to Him Who judges true.
And in His judgment will a world unfold in perfect innocence before your
eyes. Now will you see it with the eyes of Christ. Now is its
transformation clear to you.

^6^ Brothers, this day is sacred to the world. Your vision, given you
from far beyond all things within the world, looks back on them in a new
light. And what you see becomes the healing and salvation of the world.
The valuable and valueless are both perceived and recognized for what
they are. And what is worthy of your love receives your love, while
nothing to be feared remains.

^7^ We will not judge today. We will receive but what is given us from
judgment made beyond the world. Our practicing today becomes our gift of
thankfulness for our release from blindness and from misery. All that we
see will but increase our joy because its holiness reflects our own. We
stand forgiven in the sight of Christ, with all the world forgiven in
our own.

^8^ We bless the world as we behold it in the light in which our Savior
looks on us and offer it the freedom given us through His forgiving
vision, now our own. Open the curtain in your practicing by merely
letting go all things you think you want. Your trifling treasures put
away and leave a clean and open space within your mind where Christ can
come and offer you the treasure of salvation. He has need of your most
holy mind to save the world.

^9^ Is not this purpose worthy to be yours? Is not Christ's vision
worthy to be sought above the world's unsatisfying goals? Let not today
slip by without the gifts it holds for you receiving your consent and
your acceptance. We can change the world if you acknowledge them. You
may not see the value your acceptance gives the world. But this you
surely want-you can exchange all suffering for joy this very day.
Practice in earnest, and the gift is yours. Would God deceive you? Can
His promise fail? Can you withhold so little when His Hand holds out
complete salvation to His Son?
:::

[]{#part0043_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 165 Let not my mind deny the Thought of God**](#part0004.html#level-434) {#part0043_split_025.html#h1-434 .level1}

^1^ What makes this world seem real except your own denial of the truth
which lies beyond? What but your thoughts of misery and death obscure
the perfect happiness and the Eternal Life your Father wills for you?
And what could hide what cannot be concealed except illusion? What could
keep from you what you already have except your choice to see it not,
denying it is there?

^2^ The Thought of God created you. It left you not, nor have you ever
been apart from It an instant. It belongs to you. By It you live. It is
your Source of life, holding you one with It, and everything is one with
you because It left you not. The Thought of God protects you, cares for
you, makes soft your resting place and smooth your way, lighting your
mind with happiness and love. Eternity and everlasting life shine in
your mind because the Thought of God has left you not and still abides
with you.

^3^ Who would deny his safety and his peace, his joy, his healing and
his peace of mind, his quiet rest, his calm awakening if he but
recognized where they abide? Would he not instantly prepare to go where
they are found, abandoning all else as worthless in comparison with
them? And having found them, would he not make sure they stay with him
and he remains with them?

^4^ Deny not Heaven. It is yours today but for the asking. Nor need you
perceive how great the gift, how changed your mind will be before it
comes to you. Ask to receive, and it is given you. Conviction lies
within it. Till you welcome it as yours, uncertainty remains. Yet God is
fair. Sureness is not required to receive what only your acceptance can
bestow.

^5^ Ask with desire. You need not be sure that you request the only
thing you want. But when you have received, you will be sure you have
the treasure you have always sought. What would you then exchange it
for? What would induce you now to let it fade away from your ecstatic
vision? For this sight proves that you have exchanged your blindness for
the seeing eyes of Christ; your mind has come to lay aside denial and
accept the Thought of God as its inheritance.

^6^ Now is all doubting past, the journey's end made certain, and
salvation given you. Now is Christ's power in your mind to heal as you
were healed. For now you are among the saviors of the world. Your
destiny lies there and nowhere else. Would God consent to let His Son
remain forever starved by his denial of the nourishment he needs to
live? Abundance dwells in him, and deprivation cannot cut him off from
God's sustaining Love and from his home.

^7^ Practice today in hope. For hope indeed is justified. Your doubts
are meaningless, for God is certain. And the Thought of Him is never
absent. Sureness must abide within you who are host to Him. This course
removes all doubts which you have interposed between Him and your
certainty of Him. We count on God and not upon ourselves to give us
certainty. And in His Name we practice as His Word directs we do. His
sureness lies beyond our every doubt. His Love remains beyond our every
fear. The Thought of Him is still beyond all dreams and in our minds
according to His Will.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 166 I am entrusted with the gifts of God**](#part0004.html#level-435) {#part0043_split_026.html#h1-435 .level1}

^1^ All things are given you. God's trust in you is limitless. He knows
His Son. He gives without exception, holding nothing back that can
contribute to your happiness. And yet unless your will is one with His,
His gifts are not received. But what would make you think there is
another will than His?

^2^ Here is the paradox that underlies the making of the world. This
world is not the Will of God, and so it is not real. Yet those who think
it real must still believe there is another will, and one that leads to
opposite effects from those He wills. Impossible indeed, but every mind
that looks upon the world and judges it as certain, solid, trustworthy,
and true believes in two creators or in one, himself alone. But never in
one God.

^3^ The gifts of God are not acceptable to anyone who holds such strange
beliefs. He must believe that, to accept God's gifts, however evident
they may become, however urgently he may be called to claim them as his
own, is being pressed to treachery against himself. He must deny their
presence, contradict the truth, and suffer to preserve the world he
made.

^4^ Here is the only home he thinks he knows. Here is the only safety he
believes that he can find. Without the world he made is he an outcast,
homeless and afraid. He does not realize that it is here he is afraid
indeed and homeless too-an outcast wandering so far from home, so long
away, he does not realize he has forgotten where he came from, where he
goes, and even who he really is.

^5^ Yet in his lonely, senseless wanderings, God's gifts go with him,
all unknown to him. He cannot lose them. But he will not look at what is
given him. He wanders on, aware of the futility he sees about him
everywhere, perceiving how his little lot but dwindles as he goes ahead
to nowhere. Still he wanders on in misery and poverty, alone though God
is with him, and a treasure his so great that everything the world
contains is valueless before its magnitude.

^6^ He seems a sorry figure-weary, worn, in threadbare clothing, and
with feet that bleed a little from the rocky road he walks. No one but
has identified with him, for everyone who comes here has pursued the
path he follows and has felt defeat and hopelessness as he is feeling
them. Yet is he really tragic when you see that he is following the way
he chose and needs but realize Who walks with him and open up his
treasures to be free?

^7^ This is your chosen self, the one you made as a replacement for
reality. This is the self you savagely defend against all reason, every
evidence, and all the witnesses with proof to show this is not you. You
heed them not. You go on your appointed way, with eyes cast down lest
you might catch a glimpse of truth and be released from self-deception
and set free.

^8^ You cower fearfully lest you should feel Christ's touch upon your
shoulder and perceive His gentle hand directing you to look upon your
gifts. How could you then proclaim your poverty in exile? He would make
you laugh at this perception of yourself. Where is self-pity then? And
what becomes of all the tragedy you sought to make for him whom God
intended only joy?

^9^ Your ancient fear has come upon you now, and justice has caught up
with you at last. Christ's hand has touched your shoulder, and you feel
that you are not alone. You even think the miserable self you thought
was you may not be your identity. Perhaps God's Word is truer than your
own. Perhaps His gifts to you are real. Perhaps He has not wholly been
outwitted by your plan to keep His Son in deep oblivion and go the way
you chose without your Self.

^10^ God's Will does not oppose. It merely is. It is not God you have
imprisoned in your plan to lose your Self. He does not know about a plan
so alien to His Will. There was a need He did not understand, to which
He gave an Answer. That is all. And you who have this Answer given you
have need no more of anything but this.

^11^ Now do we live, for now we cannot die. The wish for death is
answered, and the sight that looked upon it now has been replaced by
vision which perceives that you are not what you pretend to be. One
walks with you Who gently answers all your fears with this one merciful
reply: "It is not so." He points to all the gifts you have each time the
thought of poverty oppresses you and speaks of His companionship when
you perceive yourself as lonely and afraid.

^12^ Yet He reminds you still of one thing more you had forgotten. For
His touch on you has made you like Himself. The gifts you have are not
for you alone. What He has come to offer you, you now must learn to
give. This is the lesson that His giving holds, for He has saved you
from the solitude you sought to make in which to hide from God. He has
reminded you of all the gifts that God has given you. He speaks as well
of what becomes your will when you accept these gifts and recognize they
are your own.

^13^ The gifts are yours, entrusted to your care to give to all who
chose the lonely road you have escaped. They do not understand they but
pursue their wishes. It is you who teach them now. For you have learned
of Christ there is another way for them to walk. Teach them by showing
them the happiness that comes to those who feel the touch of Christ and
recognize God's gifts. Let sorrow not tempt you to be unfaithful to your
trust.

^14^ Your sighs will now betray the hopes of those who look to you for
their release. Your tears are theirs. If you are sick, you but withhold
their healing. What you fear but teaches them their fears are justified.
Your hand becomes the giver of Christ's touch; your change of mind
becomes the proof that who accepts God's gifts can never suffer
anything. You are entrusted with the world's release from pain.

^15^ Betray it not. Become the living proof of what Christ's touch can
offer everyone. God has entrusted all His gifts to you. Be witness in
your happiness to how transformed the mind becomes which chooses to
accept His gifts and feel the touch of Christ. Such is your mission now.
For God entrusts the giving of His gifts to all who have received them.
He has shared His joy with you. And now you go to share it with the
world.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 167 There is one life, and that I share with God**](#part0004.html#level-436) {#part0043_split_027.html#h1-436 .level1}

^1^ There are not different kinds of life, for life is like the truth.
It does not have degrees. It is the one condition in which all that God
created share. Like all His Thoughts, it has no opposite. There is no
death because what God created shares His Life. There is no death
because an opposite to God does not exist. There is no death because the
Father and the Son are one.

^2^ In this world there appears to be a state that is life's opposite.
You call it death. Yet we have learned that the idea of death takes many
forms. It is the one idea which underlies all feelings that are not
supremely happy. It is the alarm to which you give response of any kind
that is not perfect joy. All sorrow, loss, anxiety, and suffering and
pain, even a little sigh of weariness, a slight discomfort or the merest
frown, acknowledge death. And thus deny you live.

^3^ You think that death is of the body. Yet it is but an idea,
irrelevant to what is seen as physical. A thought is in the mind. It can
be then applied as mind directs it. But its origin is where it must be
changed if change occurs. Ideas leave not their source. The emphasis
this course has placed on that idea is due to its centrality in our
attempts to change your mind about yourself. It is the reason you can
heal. It is the cause of healing. It is why you cannot die. Its truth
established you as one with God.

^4^ Death is the thought that you are separate from your Creator. It is
the belief conditions change, emotions alternate because of causes you
cannot control, you did not make, and you can never change. It is the
fixed belief ideas can leave their source and take on qualities the
source does not contain, becoming different from their own origin, apart
from it in kind as well as distance, time, and form.

^5^ Death cannot come from life. Ideas remain united to their source.
They can extend all that their source contains. In that they can go far
beyond themselves. But they cannot give birth to what was never given
them. As they are made, so will their making be. As they were born, so
will they then give birth. And where they come from, there will they
return.

^6^ The mind can think it sleeps, but that is all. It cannot change what
is its waking state. It cannot make a body nor abide within a body. What
is alien to the mind does not exist because it has no source. For mind
creates all things that are and cannot give them attributes it lacks nor
change its own eternal, mindful state. It cannot make the physical. What
seems to die is but the sign of mind asleep.

^7^ The opposite of life can only be another form of life. As such, it
can be reconciled with what created it because it is not opposite in
truth. Its form may change; it may appear to be what it is not. Yet mind
is mind awake or sleeping. It is not its opposite in anything created
nor in what it seems to make when it believes it sleeps.

^8^ God creates only mind awake. He does not sleep, and His creations
cannot share what He gives not nor make conditions which He does not
share with them. The thought of death is not the opposite to thoughts of
life. Forever unopposed by opposites of any kind, the Thoughts of God
remain forever changeless with the power to extend forever changelessly
but yet within Themselves, for They are everywhere.

^9^ What seems to be the opposite of life is merely sleeping. When the
mind elects to be what it is not and to assume an alien power which it
does not have, a foreign state it cannot enter or a false condition not
within its Source, it merely seems to go to sleep a while. It dreams of
time-an interval in which what seems to happen never has occurred, the
changes wrought are substanceless, and all events are nowhere. When the
mind awakes, it but continues as it always was.

^10^ Let us today be children of the truth and not deny our holy
heritage. Our life is not as we imagine it. Who changes life because he
shuts his eyes or makes himself what he is not because he sleeps and
sees in dreams an opposite to what he is? We will not ask for death in
any form today. Nor will we let imagined opposites to life abide even an
instant where the Thought of life eternal has been set by God Himself.

^11^ His holy home we strive to keep today as He established it, and
wills it be forever and forever. He is Lord of what we think today. And
in His Thoughts, which have no opposite, we understand there is one life
and that we share with Him, with all creation, with their thoughts as
well, whom He created in a unity of life that cannot separate in death
and leave the Source of Life from where it came.

^12^ We share our life because we have one Source, a Source from Which
perfection comes to us, remaining always in the holy minds which He
created perfect. As we were, so are we now and will forever be. A
sleeping mind must waken as it sees its own perfection mirroring the
Lord of Life so perfectly it fades into what is reflected there. And now
it is no more a mere reflection. It becomes the thing reflected and the
light which makes reflection possible. No vision now is needed. For the
wakened mind is one that knows its Source, its Self, its holiness.
:::

[]{#part0043_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 168 Your grace is given me. I claim it now**](#part0004.html#level-437) {#part0043_split_028.html#h1-437 .level1}

^1^ God speaks to us. Shall we not speak to Him? He is not distant. He
makes no attempt to hide from us. We try to hide from Him and suffer
from deception. He remains entirely accessible. He loves His Son. There
is no certainty but this, yet this suffices. He will love His Son
forever. When his mind remains asleep, He loves him still. And when his
mind awakes, He loves him with a never-changing Love.

^2^ If you but knew the meaning of His Love, hope and despair would be
impossible, for hope would be forever satisfied; despair of any kind
unthinkable. His grace His answer is to all despair, for in it lies
remembrance of His Love. Would He not gladly give the means by which His
Will is recognized? His grace is yours by your acknowledgment. And
memory of Him awakens in the mind which asks the means of Him whereby
its sleep is done.

^3^ Today we ask of God the gift He has most carefully preserved within
our hearts, waiting to be acknowledged. This the gift by which God leans
to us and lifts us up, taking salvation's final step Himself. All steps
but this we learn, instructed by His Voice. But finally He comes Himself
and takes us in His arms and sweeps away the cobwebs of our sleep. His
gift of grace is more than just an answer. It restores all memories the
sleeping mind forgot; all certainty of what love's meaning is.

^4^ God loves His Son. Request Him now to give the means by which this
world will disappear, and vision first will come with knowledge but an
instant later. For in grace you see a light that covers all the world in
love and watch fear disappear from every face as hearts rise up and
claim the light as theirs. What now remains that Heaven be delayed an
instant longer? What remains undone when your forgiveness rests on
everything?

^5^ It is a new and holy day today, for we receive what has been given
us. Our faith lies in the Giver, not our own acceptance. We acknowledge
our mistakes, but He to Whom all error is unknown is yet the One Who
answers our mistakes by giving us the means to lay them down and rise to
Him in gratitude and love.

^6^ And He descends to meet us as we come to Him, for what He has
prepared for us He gives and we receive. Such is His Will because He
loves His Son. To Him we pray today, returning but the words He gave to
us through His own Voice, His Word, His Love:

*^7^ Your grace is given me. I claim it now.\
Father, I come to You. And You will come\
To me who asks. I am the Son You love.*
:::

[]{#part0043_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 169 By grace I live. By grace I am released**](#part0004.html#level-438) {#part0043_split_029.html#h1-438 .level1}

^1^ Grace is an aspect of the Love of God which is most like the state
prevailing in the unity of truth. It is the world's most lofty
aspiration, for it leads beyond the world entirely. It is past learning
yet the goal of learning, for grace cannot come until the mind prepares
itself for true acceptance. Grace becomes inevitable instantly in those
who have prepared a table where it can be gently laid and willingly
received, an altar clean and holy for the gift.

^2^ Grace is acceptance of the Love of God within a world of seeming
hate and fear. By grace alone the hate and fear are gone, for grace
presents a state so opposite to everything the world contains that those
whose minds are lighted by the gift of grace can not believe the world
of fear is real.

^3^ Grace is not learned. The final step must go beyond all learning.
Grace is not the goal this course aspires to attain. Yet we prepare for
grace in that an open mind can hear the call to waken. It is not shut
tight against God's Voice. It has become aware that there are things it
does not know and thus is ready to accept a state completely different
from experience with which it is familiarly at home.

^4^ We have perhaps appeared to contradict our statement that the
revelation of the Father and the Son as one has been already set. But we
have also said the mind determines when that time will be and has
determined it. And yet we urge you to bear witness to the Word of God to
hasten the experience of truth and speed its advent into every mind
which recognizes its effects on you.

^5^ Oneness is simply the idea God is. And in His Being, He encompasses
all things. No mind holds anything but Him. We say "God is," and then we
cease to speak, for in that knowledge words are meaningless. There are
no lips to speak them and no part of mind sufficiently distinct to feel
that it is now aware of something not itself. It has united with its
Source, and like its Source Itself, it merely is.

^6^ We cannot speak nor write nor even think of this at all. It comes to
every mind when total recognition that its will is God's has been
completely given and received completely. It returns the mind into the
endless present, where the past and future cannot be conceived. It lies
beyond salvation-past all thought of time, forgiveness, and the holy
face of Christ. The Son of God has merely disappeared into His Father,
as his Father has in him. The world has never been at all. Eternity
remains a constant state.

^7^ This is beyond experience we try to hasten. Yet forgiveness, taught
and learned, brings with it the experiences which bear witness that the
time the mind itself determined to abandon all but this is now at hand.
We do not hasten it in that what you will offer was concealed from Him
Who teaches what forgiveness means. All learning was already in His
Mind, accomplished and complete. He recognized all that time holds and
gave it to all minds that each one might determine from a point where
time has ended when it is released to revelation and eternity.

^8^ We have repeated several times before that you but make a journey
that is done. For oneness must be here. Whatever time the mind has set
for revelation is entirely irrelevant to what must be a constant state,
forever as it always was; forever to remain as it is now. We merely take
the part assigned long since and fully recognized as perfectly fulfilled
by Him Who wrote salvation's script in His Creator's name and in the
name of His Creator's Son.

^9^ There is no need to further clarify what no one in the world can
understand. When revelation of your oneness comes, it will be known and
fully understood. Now we have work to do, for those in time can speak of
things beyond and listen to words which explain what is to come is past
already. Yet what meaning can the words convey to those who count the
hours still and rise and work and go to sleep by them?

^10^ Suffice it, then, that you have work to do to play your part. The
ending must remain obscure to you until your part is done. It does not
matter. For your part is still what all the rest depends on. As you take
the role assigned to you, salvation comes a little nearer each uncertain
heart that does not beat as yet in tune with God. Forgiveness is the
central theme which runs throughout salvation, holding all its parts in
meaningful relationships, the course it runs directed, and its outcome
sure.

^11^ And now we ask for grace, the final gift salvation can bestow.
Experience that grace provides will end in time, for grace foreshadows
Heaven yet does not replace the thought of time but for a little while.
The interval suffices. It is here that miracles are laid, to be returned
by you from holy instants you receive through grace in your experience
to all who see the light that lingers on your face.

^12^ What is the face of Christ but his who went a moment into
timelessness and brought a clear reflection of the unity he felt an
instant back to bless the world? How could you finally attain to it
forever while a part of you remains outside, unknowing, unawakened, and
in need of you as witness to the truth?

^13^ Be grateful to return, as you were glad to go an instant and accept
the gifts that grace provided you. You carry them back to yourself. And
revelation stands not far behind. Its coming is ensured. We ask for
grace and for experience that comes from grace. We welcome the release
it offers everyone. We do not ask for the unaskable. We do not look
beyond what grace can give. For this we can give in the grace that has
been given us.

^14^ Our learning goal today does not exceed this prayer, yet in the
world, what could be more than what we ask this day of Him Who gives the
grace we ask as it was given Him?

*^15^ By grace I live. By grace I am released.\
By grace I give. By grace I will release.*
:::

[]{#part0043_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 170 There is no cruelty in God and none in me**](#part0004.html#level-439) {#part0043_split_030.html#h1-439 .level1}

^1^ No one attacks without intent to hurt. This can have no exception.
When you think that you attack in self defense, you mean that to be
cruel is protection; you are safe because of cruelty. You mean that you
believe to hurt another brings you freedom. And you mean that to attack
is to exchange the state in which you are for something better, safer,
more secure from dangerous invasion and from fear.

^2^ How thoroughly insane is the idea that to defend from fear is to
attack! For here is fear begot and fed with blood, to make it grow and
swell and rage. And thus is fear protected, not escaped. Today we learn
a lesson which can save you more delay and needless misery than you can
possibly imagine. It is this:

*^3^ You make what you defend against, and by\
your own defense against it, is it real\
and inescapable. Lay down your arms,\
and only then do you perceive it false.*

^4^ It seems to be the enemy without that you attack. Yet your defense
sets up an enemy within-an alien thought at war with you, depriving you
of peace, splitting your mind into two camps which seem wholly
irreconcilable. For love now has an "enemy," an opposite; and fear, the
alien, now needs your defense against the threat of what you really are.

^5^ If you consider carefully the means by which your fancied
self-defense proceeds on its imagined way, you will perceive the
premises on which the idea stands. First, it is obvious ideas must leave
their source. For it is you who make attack and must have first
conceived of it. Yet you attack outside yourself and separate your mind
from him who is to be attacked with perfect faith the split you made is
real.

^6^ Next are the attributes of love bestowed upon its "enemy." For fear
becomes your safety and protector of your peace, to which you turn for
solace and escape from doubts about your strength and hope of rest in
dreamless quiet. And as love is shorn of what belongs to it and it
alone, love is endowed with attributes of fear. For love would ask you
lay down all defense as merely foolish. And your arms indeed would
crumble into dust. For such they are.

^7^ With love as enemy must cruelty become a god, and gods demand that
those who worship them obey their dictates and refuse to question them.
Harsh punishment is meted out relentlessly to those who ask if the
demands are sensible or even sane. It is their enemies who are
unreasonable and insane, while they are always merciful and just.

^8^ Today we look upon this cruel god dispassionately. And we note that
though his lips are smeared with blood and fire seems to flame from him,
he is but made of stone. He can do nothing. We need not defy his power.
He has none. And those who see in him their safety have no guardian, no
strength to call upon in danger, and no mighty warrior to fight for
them.

^9^ This moment can be terrible. But it can also be the time of your
release from abject slavery. You make a choice, standing before this
idol, seeing him exactly as he is. Will you restore to love what you
have sought to wrest from it and lay before this mindless piece of
stone? Or will you make another idol to replace it? For the god of
cruelty takes many forms. Another can be found.

^10^ Yet do not think that fear is the escape from fear. Let us remember
what the course has stressed about the obstacles to peace. The final
one, the hardest to believe, is nothing, and a seeming obstacle with the
appearance of a solid block, impenetrable, fearful and beyond
surmounting, is the fear of God Himself. Here is the basic premise which
enthrones the thought of fear as god. For fear is loved by those who
worship it, and love appears to be invested now with cruelty.

^11^ Where does the totally insane belief in gods of vengeance come
from? Love has not confused its attributes with those of fear. Yet must
the worshippers of fear perceive their own confusion in fear's "enemy,"
its cruelty as now a part of love. And what becomes more fearful than
the heart of Love Itself? The blood appears to be upon His Lips; the
fire comes from Him. And He is terrible above all else, cruel beyond
conception, striking down all who acknowledge Him to be their God.

^12^ The choice you make today is certain. For you look for the last
time upon this bit of carven stone you made and call it god no longer.
You have reached this place before, but you have chosen that this cruel
god remain with you in still another form, and so the fear of God
returned with you. This time you leave it here. And you return to a new
world unburdened by its weight; beheld not in its sightless eyes but in
the vision that your choice restored to you.

^13^ Now do your eyes belong to Christ, and He looks through them. Now
your voice belongs to God and echoes His. And now your heart remains at
peace forever. You have chosen Him in place of idols, and your
attributes, given by your Creator, are restored to you at last. The Call
of God is heard and answered. Now has fear made way for love, as God
Himself replaces cruelty.

*^14^ Father, we are like You. No cruelty abides in us for there is none
in You. Your peace is ours. And we bless the world with what we have
received from You alone. We choose again and make our choice for all our
brothers, knowing they are one with us. We bring them Your salvation as
we have received it now. And we give thanks for them who render us
complete. In them we see Your glory, and in them we find our peace. Holy
are we because Your holiness has set us free. And we give thanks. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0044_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review V**](#part0004.html#parta-5) {#part0044_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R5:1^ We now review again. This time we are ready to give more effort
and more time to what we undertake. We recognize we are preparing for
another phase of understanding. We would take this step completely, that
we may go on again more certain, more sincere, with faith upheld more
surely. Our footsteps have not been unwavering, and doubts have made us
walk uncertainly and slowly on the road this course sets forth. But now
we hasten on, for we approach a greater certainty, a firmer purpose and
a surer goal.

*^2^ Steady our feet, our Father; let our doubts be quiet and our holy
minds be still, and speak to us. We have no words to give to You. We
would but listen to Your Word and make it ours. Lead our practicing as
does a father lead a little child along a way he does not understand.
Yet does he follow, sure that he is safe because his father leads the
way for him.*

 

*^3^ So do we bring our practicing to You. And if we stumble, You will
raise us up. If we forget the way, we count upon Your sure remembering.
We wander off, but You will not forget to call us back. Quicken our
footsteps now, that we may walk more certainly and quickly unto You. And
we accept the Word You offer us to unify our practicing, as we review
the thoughts that You have given us.*

^4^ This is the thought which should precede the thoughts that we
review. Each one but clarifies some aspect of this thought or helps it
be more meaningful, more personal and true, and more descriptive of the
holy Self we share and now prepare to know again:

*^5^ God is but Love, and therefore so am I.*

^6^ This Self alone knows love. This Self alone is perfectly consistent
in Its thoughts, knows Its Creator, understands Itself, is perfect in
Its knowledge and Its love, and never changes from Its constant state of
union with Its Father and Itself.

^7^ And it is This that waits to meet us at the journey's ending. Every
step we take brings us a little nearer. This review will shorten time
immeasurably if we keep in mind that This remains our goal, and as we
practice, it is This to which we are approaching. Let us raise our
hearts from dust to life as we remember This is promised us, and that
this course was sent to open up the path of light to us, and teach us,
step by step, how to return to the eternal Self we thought we lost.

^8^ I take the journey with you. For I share your doubts and fears a
little while, that you may come to me who recognize the road by which
all fears and doubts are overcome. We walk together. I must understand
uncertainty and pain, although I know they have no meaning. Yet a savior
must remain with those he teaches, seeing what they see, but still
retaining in his mind the way that led him out and now will lead you out
with him. God's Son is crucified until you walk along the road with me.

^9^ My resurrection comes again each time I lead a brother safely to the
place at which the journey ends and is forgot. I am renewed each time a
brother learns there is a way from misery and pain. I am reborn each
time a brother's mind turns to the light in him and looks for me. I have
forgotten no one. Help me now to lead you back to where the journey was
begun, to make another choice with me.

^10^ Release me as you practice once again the thoughts I brought to you
from Him Who sees your bitter need and knows the answer God has given
Him. Together we review these thoughts. Together we devote our time and
effort to them. And together we will teach them to our brothers. God
would not have Heaven incomplete. It waits for you as I do. I am
incomplete without your part in me. And as I am made whole, we go
together to our ancient home, prepared for us before time was and kept
unchanged by time, immaculate and safe, as it will be at last, when time
is done.

^11^ Let this review be then your gift to me. For this alone I need-that
you will hear the words I speak and give them to the world. You are my
voice, my eyes, my feet, my hands, through which I save the world. The
Self from Which I call to you is but your own. To Him we go together.
Take your brother's hand, for this is not a way we walk alone. In him I
walk with you and you with me. Our Father wills His Son be one with Him.
What lives but must not then be one with you?

^12^ Let this review become a time in which we share a new experience
for you, yet one as old as time, and older still. Hallowed your name.
Your glory undefiled forever. And your wholeness now complete, as God
established it. You are His Son, completing His extension in your own.
We practice but an ancient truth we knew before illusion seemed to claim
the world. And we remind the world that it is free of all illusions
every time we say,

*^13^ God is but Love, and therefore so am I.*

^14^ With this we start each day of our review. With this we start and
end each period of practice time. And with this thought we sleep, to
waken once again with these same words upon our lips to greet another
day. No thought that we review but we surround with it and use the
thoughts to hold it up before our minds and keep it clear in our
remembrance throughout the day. And thus when we have finished this
review, we will have recognized the words we speak are true.

^15^ Yet are the words but aids and to be used, except at the beginning
and the end of practice periods, but to recall the mind as needed to its
purpose. We place faith in the experience that comes from practice, not
the means we use. We wait for the experience and recognize that it is
only here conviction lies. We use the words, and try and try again to go
beyond them to their meaning, which is far beyond their sound. The sound
grows dim and disappears as we approach the Source of meaning. It is
here that we find rest.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 171**](#part0004.html#level-440) {#part0044_split_001.html#h1-440 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[151\] All things are echoes of the Voice of God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[152\] The power of decision is my own.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 172**](#part0004.html#level-441) {#part0044_split_002.html#h1-441 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[153\] In my defenselessness my safety lies.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[154\] I am among the ministers of God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 173**](#part0004.html#level-442) {#part0044_split_003.html#h1-442 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[155\] I will step back and let Him lead the way.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[156\] I walk with God in perfect holiness.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 174**](#part0004.html#level-443) {#part0044_split_004.html#h1-443 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[157\] Into His Presence would I enter now.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[158\] Today I learn to give as I receive.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 175**](#part0004.html#level-444) {#part0044_split_005.html#h1-444 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[159\] I give the miracles I have received.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[160\] I am at home. Fear is the stranger here.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 176**](#part0004.html#level-445) {#part0044_split_006.html#h1-445 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[161\] Give me your blessing, holy Son of God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[162\] I am as God created me.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 177**](#part0004.html#level-446) {#part0044_split_007.html#h1-446 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[163\] There is no death. The Son of God is free.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[164\] Now are we one with Him Who is our Source.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 178**](#part0004.html#level-447) {#part0044_split_008.html#h1-447 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[165\] Let not my mind deny the Thought of God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[166\] I am entrusted with the gifts of God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 179**](#part0004.html#level-448) {#part0044_split_009.html#h1-448 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[167\] There is one life, and that I share with God.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[168\] Your grace is given me. I claim it now.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 180**](#part0004.html#level-449) {#part0044_split_010.html#h1-449 .level1}

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[169\] By grace I live. By grace I am released.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**

**\[170\] There is no cruelty in God and none in me.**

**God is but Love, and therefore so am I.**
:::

[]{#part0044_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Introduction to Lessons 181-200**](#part0004.html#level-450) {#part0044_split_011.html#h1-450 .level1}

^I181:1^ Our next few lessons make a special point of firming up your
willingness to make your weak commitment strong, your scattered goals
blend into one intent. You are not asked for total dedication all the
time, as yet. But you are asked to practice now in order to attain the
sense of peace such unified commitment will bestow, if only
intermittently. It is experiencing this which makes it sure that you
will give your total willingness to following the way the course sets
forth.

^2^ Our lessons now are geared specifically to widening horizons and
direct approaches to the special blocks which keep your vision narrow
and too limited to let you see the value of our goal. We are attempting
now to lift these blocks, however briefly. Words alone can not convey
the sense of liberation which their lifting brings. But the experience
of freedom and of peace that comes as you give up your tight control of
what you see speaks for itself. Your motivation will be so intensified
that words become of little consequence. You will be sure of what you
want and what is valueless.

^3^ And so we start our journey beyond words by concentrating first on
what impedes our progress still. Experience of what exists beyond
defensiveness remains beyond achievement while it is denied. It may be
there, but you cannot accept its presence. So we now attempt to go past
all defenses for a little while each day. No more than this is asked
because no more than this is needed. It will be enough to guarantee the
rest will come.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 181 I trust my brothers, who are one with me**](#part0004.html#level-451) {#part0044_split_012.html#h1-451 .level1}

^1^ Trusting your brothers is essential to establishing and holding up
your faith in your ability to transcend doubt and lack of sure
conviction in yourself. When you attack a brother, you proclaim that he
is limited by what you have perceived in him. You do not look beyond his
errors. Rather, they are magnified, becoming blocks to your awareness of
the Self that lies beyond your own mistakes and past his seeming sins as
well as yours.

^2^ Perception has a focus. It is this which gives consistency to what
you see. Change but this focus, and what you behold will change
accordingly. Your vision now will shift to give support to the intent
which has replaced the one you held before. Remove your focus on your
brother's sins, and you experience the peace that comes from faith in
sinlessness. This faith receives its only sure support from what you see
in others past their sins. For their mistakes, if focused on, are
witnesses to sins in you. And you will not transcend their sight and see
the sinlessness that lies beyond.

^3^ Therefore, in practicing today, we first let all such little focuses
give way to our great need to let our sinlessness become apparent. We
instruct our minds that it is this we seek and only this, for just a
little while. We do not care about our future goals, and what we saw an
instant previous has no concern for us within this interval of time
wherein we practice changing our intent. We seek for innocence and
nothing else. We seek for it with no concern but now.

^4^ A major hazard to success has been involvement with your past and
future goals. You have been quite preoccupied with how extremely
different the goals this course is advocating are from those you held
before. And you have also been dismayed by the depressing and
restricting thought that, even if you should succeed, you will
inevitably lose your way again. How could this matter? For the past is
gone, the future but imagined. These concerns are but defenses against
present change of focus in perception. Nothing more.

^5^ We lay these pointless limitations by a little while. We do not look
to past beliefs, and what we will believe will not intrude upon us now.
We enter in the time of practicing with one intent-to look upon the
sinlessness within. We recognize that we have lost this goal if anger
blocks our way in any form. And if a brother's sins occur to us, our
narrowed focus will restrict our sight and turn our eyes upon our own
mistakes, which we will magnify and call our "sins."

^6^ So, for a little while, without regard to past or future, should
such blocks arise, we will transcend them with instructions to our minds
to change their focus, as we say:

*^7^ It is not this that I would look upon.\
I trust my brothers, who are one with me.*

^8^ And we will also use these thoughts to keep us safe throughout the
day. We do not seek for long range goals. As each obstruction seems to
block the vision of our sinlessness, we seek but for surcease an instant
from the misery the focus upon sin will bring, and uncorrected will
remain.

^9^ Nor do we ask for fantasies. For what we seek to look upon is really
there. And as our focus goes beyond mistakes, we will behold a wholly
sinless world. When seeing this is all we want to see, when this is all
we seek for in the name of true perception, are the eyes of Christ
inevitably ours. And the love He feels for us becomes our own as well.
This will become the only thing we see reflected in the world and in
ourselves.

^10^ The world which once proclaimed our sins becomes the proof that we
are sinless. And our love for everyone we look upon attests to our
remembrance of the holy Self Which knows no sin and never could conceive
of anything without Its sinlessness. We seek for this remembrance as we
turn our minds to practicing today. We look neither ahead nor backwards.
We look straight into the present. And we give our trust to the
experience we ask for now. Our sinlessness is but the Will of God. This
instant is our willing one with His.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 182 I will be still a moment and go home**](#part0004.html#level-452) {#part0044_split_013.html#h1-452 .level1}

^1^ This world you seem to live in is not home to you. And somewhere in
your mind you know that this is true. A memory of home keeps haunting
you, as if there were a place that called you to return, although you do
not recognize the Voice nor what it is the Voice reminds you of. Yet
still you feel an alien here, from somewhere all unknown. Nothing so
definite that you could say with certainty you are an exile here. Just a
persistent feeling, sometimes not more than a tiny throb, at other times
hardly remembered, actively dismissed, but surely to return to mind
again.

^2^ No one but knows whereof we speak. Yet some try to put by their
suffering in games they play to occupy their time and keep their sadness
from them. Others will deny that they are sad and do not recognize their
tears at all. Still others will maintain that what we speak of is
illusion, not to be considered more than but a dream. Yet who in simple
honesty, without defensiveness and self-deception, would deny he
understands the words we speak?

^3^ We speak today for everyone who walks this world, for he is not at
home. He goes uncertainly about in endless search, seeking in darkness
what he cannot find, not recognizing what it is he seeks. A thousand
homes he makes, yet none contents his restless mind. He does not
understand he builds in vain. The home he seeks can not be made by him.
There is no substitute for Heaven. All he ever made was hell.

^4^ Perhaps you think it is your childhood home that you would find
again. The childhood of your body and its place of shelter are a memory
now so distorted that you merely hold a picture of a past that never
happened. Yet there is a Child in you Who seeks His Father's house and
knows that He is alien here. This Childhood is eternal, with an
innocence that will endure forever. Where this Child shall go is holy
ground. It is His holiness that lights up Heaven and that brings to
earth the pure reflection of the light above, wherein are earth and
Heaven joined as one.

^5^ It is this Child in you your Father knows as His own Son. It is this
Child Who knows His Father. He desires to go home so deeply, so
unceasingly, His voice cries unto you to let Him rest a while. He does
not ask for more than just a few instants of respite-just an interval in
which He can return to breathe again the holy air that fills His
Father's house. You are His home as well. He will return. But give Him
just a little time to be Himself within the peace that is His home,
resting in silence and in peace and love.

^6^ This Child needs your protection. He is far from home. He is so
little that He seems so easily shut out, His tiny Voice so readily
obscured, His calls for help almost unheard amid the grating sounds and
harsh and rasping noises of the world. Yet does He know that in you
still abides His sure protection. You will fail Him not. He will go
home, and you along with Him.

^7^ This Child is your defenselessness, your strength. He trusts in you.
He came because He knew you would not fail. He whispers of His home
unceasingly to you. For He would bring you back with Him, that He
Himself might stay and not return again where He does not belong and
where He lives an outcast in a world of alien thoughts. His patience has
no limits. He will wait until you hear His gentle Voice within you,
calling you to let Him go in peace along with you to where He is at home
and you with Him.

^8^ When you are still an instant, when the world recedes from you, when
valueless ideas cease to have value in your restless mind, then will you
hear His Voice. So poignantly He calls to you that you will not resist
Him longer. In that instant, He will take you to His home, and you will
stay with Him in perfect stillness, silent and at peace, beyond all
words, untouched by fear and doubt, sublimely certain that you are at
home.

^9^ Rest with Him frequently today. For He was willing to become a
little child that you might learn of Him how strong is he who comes
without defenses, offering only love's messages to those who think he is
their enemy. He holds the might of Heaven in His hand and calls them
friend, and gives His strength to them that they may see He would be
Friend to them. He asks but they protect Him, for His home is far away,
and He will not return to it alone.

^10^ Christ is reborn as but a little Child each time a wanderer would
leave his home. For he must learn that what he would protect is but this
Child, Who comes defenseless and Who is protected by defenselessness. Go
home with Him from time to time today. You are as much an alien here as
He.

^11^ Take time today to lay aside your shield which profits nothing and
lay down the spear and sword you raised against an enemy without
existence. Christ has called you friend and brother. He has even come to
you to ask your help in letting Him go home completed and completely. He
has come as does a little child who must beseech his father for
protection and for love. He rules the universe, and yet He asks
unceasingly that you return with Him and take illusions as your gods no
more.

^12^ You have not lost your innocence. It is for this you yearn. This is
your heart's desire. This is the Voice you hear, and this the Call which
cannot be denied. The holy Child remains with you. His home is yours.
Today He gives you His defenselessness, and you accept it in exchange
for all the toys of battle you have made. And now the way is open, and
the journey has an end in sight at last. Be still a moment and go home
with Him, and be at peace a while.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 183 I call upon God's Name and on my own**](#part0004.html#level-453) {#part0044_split_014.html#h1-453 .level1}

^1^ God's Name is holy, but no holier than yours. To call upon His Name
is but to call upon your own. A father gives his son his name, and thus
identifies the son with him. His brothers share his name, and thus are
they united in a bond to which they turn for their identity. Your
Father's Name reminds you who you are, even within a world that does not
know; even though you have not remembered it.

^2^ God's Name cannot be heard without response, nor said without an
echo in the mind which calls you to remember. Say His Name, and you
invite the angels to surround the ground on which you stand and sing to
you as they spread out their wings to keep you safe and shelter you from
every worldly thought that would intrude upon your holiness.

^3^ Repeat God's Name and all the world responds by laying down
illusions. Every dream the world holds dear has suddenly gone by, and
where it seemed to stand you find a star; a miracle of grace. The sick
arise, healed of their sickly thoughts. The blind can see; the deaf can
hear; the sorrowful cast off their mourning, and the tears of pain are
dried as happy laughter comes to bless the world.

^4^ Repeat the Name of God and little names have lost their meaning. No
temptation but becomes a nameless and unwanted thing before God's Name.
Repeat His Name and see how easily you will forget the names of all the
gods you value. They have lost the name of god you gave them. They
become anonymous and valueless to you, although before you let the Name
of God replace their little names, you stood before them worshipfully,
naming them as gods.

^5^ Repeat the Name of God and call upon your Self, Whose Name is His.
Repeat His Name and all the tiny, nameless things on earth slip into
right perspective. Those who call upon the Name of God cannot mistake
the nameless for the Name, nor sin for grace, nor bodies for the holy
Son of God.

^6^ And should you join a brother as you sit with him in silence and
repeat God's Name along with him within your quiet minds, you have
established there an altar which reaches to God Himself and to His Son.
Practice but this today; repeat God's Name slowly again and still again.
Become oblivious to every name but His.

^7^ Hear nothing else. Let all your thoughts become anchored on this. No
other words we use except at the beginning, when we say today's idea but
once. And then God's Name becomes our only thought, our only word, the
only thing that occupies our minds, the only wish we have, the only
sound with any meaning, and the only name of everything that we desire
to see; of everything that we would call our own.

^8^ Thus do we give an invitation which can never be refused. And God
will come and answer it Himself. Think not He hears the little prayers
of those who call on Him with names of idols cherished by the world.
They cannot reach Him thus. He cannot hear requests that He be not
Himself or that His Son receive another name than His.

^9^ Repeat His Name, and you acknowledge Him as sole Creator of reality.
And you acknowledge also that His Son is part of Him, creating in His
Name. Sit silently, and let His Name become the all-encompassing idea
which holds your mind completely. Let all thoughts be still except this
one. And to all other thoughts respond with this, and see God's Name
replace the thousand little names you gave your thoughts, not realizing
that there is one Name for all there is and all that there will be.

^10^ Today you can achieve a state in which you will experience the
gifts of grace. You can escape all bondage of the world and give the
world the same release you found. You can remember what the world forgot
and offer it your own remembering. You can accept today the part you
play in its salvation and your own as well, and both can be accomplished
perfectly.

^11^ Turn to the Name of God for your release, and it is given you. No
prayer but this is necessary, for it holds them all within it. Words are
insignificant and all requests unneeded when God's Son calls on his
Father's Name. His Father's Thoughts become his own. He makes his claim
to all his Father gave, is giving still, and will forever give. He calls
on Him to let all things he thought he made be nameless now, and in
their place the holy Name of God becomes his judgment of their
worthlessness.

^12^ All little things are silent. Little sounds are soundless now. The
little things of earth have disappeared. The universe consists of
nothing but the Son of God who calls upon his Father. And his Father's
Voice gives answer in his Father's holy Name. In this eternal, still
relationship, in which communication far transcends all words and yet
exceeds in depth and height whatever words could possibly convey, is
peace eternal. In our Father's Name, we would experience this peace
today. And in His Name it shall be given us.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 184 The Name of God is my inheritance**](#part0004.html#level-454) {#part0044_split_015.html#h1-454 .level1}

^1^ You live by symbols. You have made up names for everything you see.
Each one becomes a separate entity, identified by its own name. By this
you carve it out of unity. By this you designate its special attributes
and set it off from other things by emphasizing space surrounding it.
This space you lay between all things to which you give a different
name-all happenings in terms of place and time, all bodies which are
greeted by a name.

^2^ This space you see as setting off all things from one another is the
means by which the world's perception is achieved. You see something
where nothing is and see as well nothing where there is unity-a space
between all things, between all things and you. Thus do you think that
you have given life in separation. By this split you think you are
established as a unity which functions with an independent will.

^3^ What are these names by which the world becomes a series of discrete
events, of things un-unified, of bodies kept apart and holding bits of
mind as separate awarenesses? You gave these names to them, establishing
perception as you wished to have perception be. The nameless things were
given names and thus reality was given them as well. For what is named
is given meaning and will then be seen as meaningful, a cause of true
effects with consequence inherent in itself.

^4^ This is the way reality is made by partial vision, purposefully set
against the given truth. Its enemy is wholeness. It conceives of little
things and looks upon them. And a lack of space, a sense of unity or
vision which sees differently become the threats which it must overcome,
conflict with, and deny.

^5^ Yet does this other vision still remain a natural direction for the
mind to channel its perception. It is hard to teach the mind a thousand
alien names and thousands more. Yet you believe this is what learning
means-its one essential goal by which communication is achieved and
concepts can be meaningfully shared.

^6^ This is the sum of the inheritance the world bestows. And everyone
who learns to think that it is so accepts the signs and symbols which
assert the world is real. It is for this they stand. They leave no doubt
that what is named is there. It can be seen, as is anticipated. What
denies that it is true is but illusion, for it is the ultimate reality.
To question it is madness; to accept its presence is the proof of
sanity.

^7^ Such is the teaching of the world. It is a phase of learning
everyone who comes must go through. But the sooner he perceives on what
it rests, how questionable are its premises, how doubtful its results,
the sooner does he question its effects. Learning which stops with what
the world would teach stops short of meaning. In its proper place, it
serves but as a starting point from which another kind of learning can
begin, a new perception can be gained, and all the arbitrary names the
world bestows can be withdrawn as they are raised to doubt.

^8^ Think not you made the world. Illusions, yes! But what is true in
earth and Heaven is beyond your naming. When you call upon a brother, it
is to his body that you make appeal. His true identity is hidden from
you by what you believe he really is. His body makes response to what
you call him, for his mind consents to take the name you give him as his
own. And thus his unity is twice denied, for you perceive him separate
from you, and he accepts this separate name as his.

^9^ It would indeed be strange if you were asked to go beyond all
symbols of the world, forgetting them forever; yet were asked to take a
teaching function. You have need to use the symbols of the world a
while. But be you not deceived by them as well. They do not stand for
anything at all, and in your practicing, it is this thought that will
release you from them. They become but means by which you can
communicate in ways the world can understand, but which you recognize is
not the unity where true communication can be found.

^10^ Thus what you need are intervals each day in which the learning of
the world becomes a transitory phase-a prison house from which you go
into the sunlight and forget the darkness. Here you understand the Word,
the Name which God has given you; the one identity which all things
share; the one acknowledgment of what is true. And then step back to
darkness, not because you think it real, but only to proclaim its
unreality in terms which still have meaning in the world which darkness
rules.

^11^ Use all the little names and symbols which delineate the world of
darkness. Yet accept them not as your reality. The Holy Spirit uses all
of them, but He does not forget creation has one Name, one Meaning, and
a single Source Which unifies all things within Itself. Use all the
names the world bestows on them but for convenience, yet do not forget
they share the Name of God along with you.

^12^ God has no name. And yet His Name becomes the final lesson that all
things are one, and at this lesson does all learning end. All names are
unified; all space is filled with truth's reflection. Every gap is
closed and separation healed. The Name of God is the inheritance He gave
to those who chose the teaching of the world to take the place of
Heaven. In our practicing, our purpose is to let our minds accept what
He has given as the answer to the pitiful inheritance you made as
fitting tribute to the Son He loves.

^13^ No one can fail who seeks the meaning of the Name of God.
Experience must come to supplement the Word. But first you must accept
one Name for all reality, and realize the many names you gave its
aspects have distorted what you see but have not interfered with truth
at all. One Name we bring into our practicing. One Name we use to unify
our sight.

^14^ And though we use a different name for each awareness of an aspect
of God's Son, we understand that they have but one Name, Which He has
given them. It is this Name we use in practicing. And through Its use,
all foolish separations disappear which kept us blind. And we are given
strength to see beyond them. Now our sight is blessed with blessings we
can give as we receive.

*^15^ Father, our Name is Yours. In It we are united with all living
things and You Who are their one Creator. What we made and call by many
different names is but a shadow we have tried to cast across Your own
reality. And we are glad and thankful we were wrong. All our mistakes we
give to You, that we may be absolved of all effects our errors seemed to
have. And we accept the truth You give in place of every one of them.
Your Name is our salvation and escape from what we made. Your Name
unites us in the oneness which is our inheritance and peace. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0044_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 185 I want the peace of God**](#part0004.html#level-455) {#part0044_split_016.html#h1-455 .level1}

^1^ To say these words is nothing. But to mean these words is
everything. If you could but mean them for just an instant, there would
be no further sorrow possible for you in any form, in any place or time.
Heaven would be completely given back to full awareness, memory of God
entirely restored, the resurrection of all creation fully recognized.

^2^ No one can mean these words and not be healed. He cannot play with
dreams nor think he is himself a dream. He cannot make a hell and think
it real. He wants the peace of God, and it is given him. For that is all
he wants, and that is all he will receive. Many have said these words.
But few indeed have meant them. You have but to look upon the world you
see around you to be sure how very few they are. The world would be
completely changed should any two agree these words express the only
thing they want.

^3^ Two minds with one intent become so strong that what they will
becomes the Will of God. For minds can only join in truth. In dreams no
two can share the same intent. To each the hero of the dream is
different; the outcome wanted not the same for both. Loser and gainer
merely shift about in changing patterns, as the ratio of gain to loss
and loss to gain takes on a different aspect of another form.

^4^ Yet compromise alone a dream can bring. Sometimes it takes the form
of union, but only the form. The meaning must escape the dream, for
compromising is the goal of dreaming. Minds cannot unite in dreams. They
merely bargain. And what bargain can give them the peace of God?
Illusions come to take His place. And what He means is lost to sleeping
minds intent on compromise, each to his gain and to another's loss.

^5^ To mean you want the peace of God is to renounce all dreams. For no
one means these words who wants illusions and who therefore seeks the
means which bring illusions. He has looked on them and found them
wanting. Now he seeks to go beyond them, recognizing that another dream
would offer nothing more than all the others. Dreams are one to him. And
he has learned their only difference is one of form, for one will bring
the same despair and misery as do the rest.

^6^ The mind which means that all it wants is peace must join with other
minds, for that is how peace is obtained. And when the wish for peace is
genuine, the means for finding it are given in a form each mind which
seeks for it in honesty can understand. Whatever form the lesson takes
is planned for him in such a way that he can not mistake it if his
asking is sincere. And if he asks without sincerity, there is no form in
which the lesson will meet with acceptance and be truly learned.

^7^ Let us today devote our practicing to recognizing that we really
mean the words we say. We want the peace of God. This is no idle wish.
These words do not request another dream be given us. They do not ask
for compromise nor try to make another bargain in the hope that there
may yet be one which can succeed where all the rest have failed. To mean
these words acknowledges illusions are in vain, requesting the eternal
in the place of shifting dreams which seem to change in what they offer,
but are one in nothingness.

^8^ Today devote your practice periods to careful searching of your mind
to find the dreams you cherish still. What do you ask for in your heart?
Forget the words you use in making your requests. Consider but what you
believe will comfort you and bring you happiness. But be you not
dismayed by lingering illusions, for their form is not what matters now.
Let not some dreams be more acceptable, reserving shame and secrecy for
others. They are one.

^9^ And being one, one question should be asked of all of them: "Is this
what I would have, in place of Heaven and the peace of God?" This is the
choice you make. Be not deceived that it is otherwise. No compromise is
possible in this. You choose God's peace, or you have asked for dreams.
And dreams will come as you requested them. Yet will God's peace come
just as certainly and to remain with you forever. It will not be gone
with every twist and turning of the road to reappear unrecognized in
forms which shift and change with every step you take.

^10^ You want the peace of God. And so do all who seem to seek for
dreams. For them as well as for yourself you ask but this when you make
this request with deep sincerity. For thus you reach to what they really
want and join your own intent with what they seek above all things,
perhaps unknown to them, but sure to you. You have been weak at times,
uncertain in your purpose and unsure of what you wanted, where to look
for it, and where to turn for help in the attempt. Help has been given
you. And would you not avail yourself of it by sharing it?

^11^ No one who truly seeks the peace of God can fail to find it. For he
merely asks that he deceive himself no longer by denying to himself what
is God's Will. Who can remain unsatisfied who asks for what he has
already? Who could be unanswered who requests an answer which is his to
give? The peace of God is yours.

^12^ For you it was created, given you by its Creator and established as
His own eternal gift. How can you fail when you but ask for what He
wills for you? And how could your request be limited to you alone? No
gift of God can be unshared. It is this attribute that sets the gifts of
God apart from every dream that ever seemed to take the place of truth.

^13^ No one can lose and everyone must gain whenever any gift of God has
been requested and received by anyone. God gives but to unite. To take
away is meaningless to Him. And when it is as meaningless to you, you
can be sure you share one Will with Him, and He with you. And you will
also know you share one Will with all your brothers, whose intent is
yours.

^14^ It is this one intent we seek today, uniting our desires with the
need of every heart, the call of every mind, the hope that lies beyond
despair, the love attack would hide, the brotherhood that hate has
sought to sever, but which still remains as God created it. With help
like this beside us, can we fail today as we request the peace of God be
given us?
:::

[]{#part0044_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 186 Salvation of the world depends on me**](#part0004.html#level-456) {#part0044_split_017.html#h1-456 .level1}

^1^ Here is the statement that will one day take all arrogance away from
every mind. Here is the thought of true humility which holds no function
as your own but that which has been given you. It offers your acceptance
of a part assigned to you, without insisting on another role. It does
not judge your proper role. It but acknowledges the Will of God is done
on earth as well as Heaven. It unites all wills on earth in Heaven's
plan to save the world, restoring it to Heaven's peace.

^2^ Let us not fight our function. We did not establish it. It is not
our idea. The means are given us by which it will be perfectly
accomplished. All that we are asked to do is to accept our part in
genuine humility and not deny with self-deceiving arrogance that we are
worthy. What is given us to do we have the strength to do. Our minds are
suited perfectly to take the part assigned to us by One Who knows us
well.

^3^ Today's idea may seem quite sobering until you see its meaning. All
it says is that your Father still remembers you and offers you the
perfect trust He holds in you who are His Son. It does not ask that you
be different in any way from what you are. What could humility request
but this? And what could arrogance deny but this? Today we will not
shrink from our assignment on the specious grounds that modesty is
outraged. It is pride that would deny the call of God Himself.

^4^ All false humility we lay aside today that we may listen to God's
Voice reveal to us what He would have us do. We do not doubt our
adequacy for the function He will offer us. We will be certain only that
He knows our strengths, our wisdom, and our holiness. And if He deems us
worthy, so we are. It is but arrogance that judges otherwise.

^5^ There is one way and only one to be released from the imprisonment
your plan to prove the false is true has brought to you. Accept the plan
you did not make instead. Judge not your value to it. If God's Voice
assures you that salvation needs your part and that the whole depends on
you, be sure that it is so. The arrogant must cling to words, afraid to
go beyond them to experience which might affront their stance. Yet are
the humble free to hear the Voice which tells them what they are and
what to do.

^6^ Arrogance makes an image of yourself that is not real. It is this
image which quails and retreats in terror as the Voice for God assures
you that you have the strength, the wisdom, and the holiness to go
beyond all images. You are not weak, as is the image of yourself. You
are not ignorant and helpless. Sin can not tarnish the truth in you, and
misery can come not near the holy home of God.

^7^ All this the Voice for God relates to you. And as He speaks, the
image trembles and seeks to attack the threat it does not know, sensing
its basis crumble. Let it go. Salvation of the world depends on you and
not upon this little pile of dust. What can it tell the holy Son of God?
Why need he be concerned with it at all?

^8^ And so we find our peace. We will accept the function God has given
us, for all illusions rest upon the weird belief that we can make
another for ourselves. Our self-made roles are shifting, and they seem
to change from mourner to ecstatic bliss of loved and loving. We can
laugh or weep and greet the day with welcome or with tears. Our very
being seems to change as we experience a thousand shifts in mood, and
our emotions raise us high indeed or dash us to the ground in
hopelessness.

^9^ Is this the Son of God? Could He create such instability and call it
Son? He Who is changeless shares His attributes with His creation. All
the images His Son appears to make have no effect on what he is. They
blow across his mind like windswept leaves that form a patterning an
instant, break apart to group again, and scamper off. Or like mirages
seen above a desert, rising from the dust.

^10^ These unsubstantial images will go and leave your mind unclouded
and serene when you accept the function given you. The images you make
give rise to but conflicting goals, impermanent and vague, uncertain and
ambiguous. Who could be constant in his efforts or direct his energies
and concentrated drive toward goals like these? The functions which the
world esteems are so uncertain that they change ten times an hour at
their most secure. What hope of gain can rest on goals like this?

^11^ In lovely contrast, certain as the sun's return each morning to
dispel the night, your truly given function stands out clear and wholly
unambiguous. There is no doubt of its validity. It comes from One Who
knows no error. And His Voice is certain of its messages. They will not
change nor be in conflict. All of them point to one goal, and one you
can attain. Your plan may be impossible, but God's can never fail
because He is its Source.

^12^ Do as His Voice directs. And if it asks a thing of you that seems
impossible, remember Who it is that asks and who would make denial. Then
consider this-which is more likely to be right? The Voice that speaks
for the Creator of all things Who knows all things exactly as they are,
or a distorted image of yourself, confused, bewildered, inconsistent and
unsure of everything? Let not its voice direct you. Hear instead a
certain Voice Which tells you of a function given you by your Creator,
Who remembers you and urges that you now remember Him.

^13^ His gentle Voice is calling from the known to the unknowing. He
would comfort you, although He knows no sorrow. He would make a
restitution, though He is complete; a gift to you, although He knows
that you have everything already. He has Thoughts which answer every
need His Son perceives, although He sees them not. For Love must give,
and what is given in His Name takes on the form most useful in a world
of form.

^14^ These are the forms which never can deceive, although they come
from Formlessness Itself. Forgiveness is an earthly form of love which
as it is in Heaven has no form. Yet what is needed here is given here as
it is needed. In this form, you can fulfil your function even here,
although what love will mean to you when formlessness has been restored
to you is greater still. Salvation of the world depends on you who can
forgive. Such is your function here.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 187 I bless the world because I bless myself**](#part0004.html#level-457) {#part0044_split_018.html#h1-457 .level1}

^1^ No one can give unless he has. In fact, giving is proof of having.
We have made this point before. What seems to make it hard to credit is
not this. No one can doubt that you must first possess what you would
give. It is the second phase on which the world and true perception
differ. Having had and given, then the world asserts that you have lost
what you possessed. The truth maintains that giving will increase what
you possess.

^2^ How is this possible? For it is sure that if you give a finite thing
away, your body's eyes will not perceive it yours. Yet we have learned
that things but represent the thoughts that make them. And you do not
lack for proof that when you give ideas away, you strengthen them in
your own mind. Perhaps the form in which the thought seems to appear is
changed in giving. Yet it must return to him who gives. Nor can the form
it takes be less acceptable. It must be more.

^3^ Ideas must first belong to you before you give them. If you are to
save the world, you first accept salvation for yourself. But you will
not believe that this is done until you see the miracles it brings to
everyone you look upon. Herein is the idea of giving clarified and given
meaning. Now you can perceive that by your giving is your store
increased.

^4^ Protect all things you value by the act of giving them away, and you
are sure that you will never lose them. What you thought you did not
have is thereby proven yours. Yet value not its form. For this will
change and grow unrecognizable in time, however much you try to keep it
safe. No form endures. It is the thought behind the form of things that
lives unchangeable.

^5^ Give gladly. You can only gain thereby. The thought remains and
grows in strength as it is reinforced by giving. Thoughts extend as they
are shared, for they cannot be lost. There is no giver and receiver in
the sense the world conceives of them. There is a giver who retains,
another who will give as well. And both must gain in this exchange, for
each will have the thought in form most helpful to him. What he seems to
lose is always something he will value less than what will surely be
returned to him.

^6^ Never forget you give but to yourself. Who understands what giving
means must laugh at the idea of sacrifice. Nor can he fail to recognize
the many forms which sacrifice may take. He laughs as well at pain and
loss, at sickness and at grief, at poverty, starvation and at death. He
recognizes sacrifice remains the one idea that stands behind them all,
and in his gentle laughter are they healed.

^7^ Illusions recognized must disappear. Accept not suffering, and you
remove the thought of suffering. Your blessing lies on everyone who
suffers when you choose to see all suffering as what it is. The thought
of sacrifice gives rise to all the forms that suffering appears to take.
And sacrifice is an idea so mad that sanity dismisses it at once.

^8^ Never believe that you can sacrifice. There is no place for
sacrifice in what has any value. If the thought occurs, its very
presence proves that error has arisen and correction must be made. Your
blessing will correct it. Given first to you, it now is yours to give as
well. No form of sacrifice and suffering can long endure before the face
of one who has forgiven and has blessed himself.

^9^ The lilies that your brother offers you are laid upon your altar,
with the ones you offer him beside them. Who could fear to look upon
such lovely holiness? The great illusion of the fear of God diminishes
to nothingness before the purity that you will look on here. Be not
afraid to look. The blessedness you will behold will take away all
thought of form, and leave instead the perfect gift forever there,
forever to increase, forever yours, forever given away.

^10^ Now are we one in thought, for fear has gone. And here, before the
altar to one God, one Father, one Creator and one Thought, we stand
together as one Son of God. Not separate from Him Who is our Source; not
distant from one brother who is part of our One Self Whose innocence has
joined us all as one, we stand in blessedness and give as we receive.
The Name of God is on our lips. And as we look within, we see the purity
of Heaven shine in our reflection of our Father's Love.

^11^ Now are we blessed, and now we bless the world. What we have looked
upon we would extend, for we would see it everywhere. We would behold it
shining with the grace of God in everyone. We would not have it be
withheld from anything we look upon. And to ensure this holy sight is
ours, we offer it to everything we see. For where we see it, it will be
returned to us in form of lilies we can lay upon our altar, making it a
home for Innocence Itself, Who dwells in us and offers us His Holiness
as ours.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 188 The peace of God is shining in me now**](#part0004.html#level-458) {#part0044_split_019.html#h1-458 .level1}

^1^ Why wait for Heaven? Those who seek the light are merely covering
their eyes. The light is in them now. Enlightenment is but a
recognition, not a change at all. Light is not of the world, yet you who
bear the light in you are alien here as well. The light came with you
from your native home and stayed with you because it is your own. It is
the only thing you bring with you from Him Who is your Source. It shines
in you because it lights your home and leads you back to where it came
from and you are at home.

^2^ This light cannot be lost. Why wait to find it in the future or
believe it has been lost already or was never there? It can so easily be
looked upon that arguments which prove it is not there become
ridiculous. Who can deny the presence of what he beholds in him? It is
not difficult to look within, for there all vision starts. There is no
sight, be it of dreams or from a truer source, that is not but the
shadow of the seen through inward vision. There perception starts, and
there it ends. It has no source but this.

^3^ The peace of God is shining in you now and from your heart extends
around the world. It pauses to caress each living thing and leave a
blessing with it which remains forever and forever. What it gives must
be eternal. It removes all thoughts of the ephemeral and valueless. It
brings renewal to all tired hearts and lights all vision as it passes
by. All of its gifts are given everyone, and everyone unites in giving
thanks to you who give and you who have received.

^4^ The shining in your mind reminds the world of what it has forgotten,
and the world restores the memory to you as well. From you salvation
radiates with gifts beyond all measure, given and returned. To you, the
giver of the gift, does God Himself give thanks. And in His blessing
does the light in you shine brighter, adding to the gifts you have to
offer to the world.

^5^ The peace of God can never be contained. Who recognizes it within
himself must give it. And the means for giving it are in his
understanding. He forgives because he recognized the truth in him. The
peace of God is shining in you now and in all living things. In
quietness is it acknowledged universally. For what your inward vision
looks upon is your perception of the universe.

^6^ Sit quietly and close your eyes. The light within you is sufficient.
It alone has power to give the gift of sight to you. Exclude the outer
world and let your thoughts fly to the peace within. They know the way.
For honest thoughts, untainted by the dream of worldly things outside
yourself, become the holy messengers of God Himself. These thoughts you
think with Him. They recognize their home. And they point surely to
their Source where God the Father and the Son are one.

^7^ God's peace is shining on them, but they must remain with you as
well, for they were born within your mind as yours was born in God's.
They lead you back to peace from where they came but to remind you how
you must return. They heed your Father's Voice when you refuse to
listen. And they urge you gently to accept His Word for what you are
instead of fantasies and shadows. They remind you that you are the
co-creator of all things that live. For as the peace of God is shining
in you, it must shine on them.

^8^ We practice coming nearer to the light in us today. We take our
wandering thoughts and gently bring them back to where they fall in line
with all the thoughts we share with God. We will not let them stray. We
let the light within our minds direct them to come home. We have
betrayed them, ordering that they depart from us. But now we call them
back and wash them clean of strange desires and disordered wishes. We
restore to them the holiness of their inheritance.

^9^ Thus are our minds restored with them, and we acknowledge that the
peace of God still shines in us and from us to all living things that
share our life. We will forgive them all, absolving all the world of
what we thought it did to us. For it is we who make the world as we
would have it. Now we choose that it be innocent, devoid of sin, and
open to salvation. And we lay our saving blessing on it as we say:

*^10^ The peace of God is shining in me now.\
Let all things shine upon me in*
:::

[]{#part0044_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 189 I feel the Love of God within me now**](#part0004.html#level-459) {#part0044_split_020.html#h1-459 .level1}

^1^ There is a light in you the world can not perceive. And with your
eyes you will not see this light, for you are blinded by the world. Yet
you have eyes to see it. It is there for you to look upon. It was not
placed in you to be kept hidden from your sight. This light is a
reflection of the thought we practice now. To feel the Love of God
within you is to see the world anew, shining in innocence, alive with
hope, and blessed with perfect charity and love.

^2^ Who could feel fear in such a world as this? It welcomes you,
rejoices that you came, and sings your praises as it keeps you safe from
every form of danger and of pain. It offers you a warm and gentle home
in which to stay a while. It blesses you throughout the day and watches
through the night as silent guardian of your holy sleep. It sees
salvation in you and protects the light in you in which it sees its own.
It offers you its flowers and its snow in thankfulness for your
benevolence.

^3^ This is the world the Love of God reveals. It is so different from
the world you see through darkened eyes of malice and of fear that one
belies the other. Only one can be perceived at all. The other one is
wholly meaningless. A world in which forgiveness shines on everything
and peace offers its gentle light to everyone is inconceivable to those
who see a world of hatred, rising from attack, poised to avenge, to
murder and destroy.

^4^ Yet is the world of hatred equally unseen and inconceivable to those
who feel God's Love in them. Their world reflects the quietness and
peace that shines in them, the gentleness and innocence they see
surrounding them, the joy with which they look out from the endless
wells of joy within. What they have felt in them they look upon and see
its sure reflection everywhere.

^5^ What would you see? The choice is given you. But learn and do not
let your mind forget this law of seeing: you will look upon that which
you feel within. If hatred finds a place within your heart, you will
perceive a fearful world, held cruelly in death's sharp-pointed, bony
fingers. If you feel the Love of God within you, you look out upon a
world of mercy and of love.

^6^ Today we pass illusions as we seek to reach to what is true in us
and feel Its all-embracing tenderness, Its Love Which knows us perfect
as Itself, Its sight which is the gift Its Love bestows on us. We learn
the way today. It is as sure as Love Itself, to Which it carries us. For
its simplicity avoids the snares the foolish convolutions of the world's
apparent reasoning but serve to hide.

^7^ Simply do this: be still and lay aside all thoughts of what you are
and what God is, all concepts you have learned about the world, all
images you hold about yourself. Empty your mind of everything it thinks
is either true or false or good or bad, of every thought it judges
worthy and all the ideas of which it is ashamed. Hold onto nothing. Do
not bring with you one thought the past has taught nor one belief you
ever learned before from anything. Forget this world, forget this
course, and come with wholly empty hands unto your God.

^8^ Is it not He Who knows the way to you? You need not know the way to
Him. Your part is simply to allow all obstacles that you have interposed
between the Son and God the Father to be quietly removed forever. God
will do His part in joyful and immediate response. Ask and receive. But
do not make demands nor point the road to God by which He should appear
to you. The way to reach Him is merely to let Him be. For in that way is
your reality acclaimed as well.

^9^ And so today we do not choose the way in which we go to Him. But we
do choose to let Him come. And with this choice we rest. And in our
quiet hearts and open minds His Love will blaze its pathway of itself.
What has not been denied is surely there if it be true, and can be
surely reached. God knows His Son and knows the way to him. He does not
need His Son to show Him how to find His way. Through every opened door
His Love shines outward from its home within and lightens up the world
in innocence.

*^10^ Father, we do not know the way to You. But we have called, and You
have answered us. We will not interfere. Salvation's ways are not our
own, for they belong to You. And it is unto You we look for them. Our
hands are open to receive Your gifts. We have no thoughts we think apart
from You and cherish no beliefs of what we are or who created us. Yours
is the way that we would find and follow. And we ask but that Your Will,
which is our own as well, be done in us and in the world, that it
becomes a part of Heaven now. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0044_split_021.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 190 I choose the joy of God instead of pain**](#part0004.html#level-460) {#part0044_split_021.html#h1-460 .level1}

^1^ Pain is a wrong perspective. When it is experienced in any form, it
is a proof of self-deception. It is not a fact at all. There is no form
it takes which will not disappear if seen aright. For pain proclaims God
cruel. How could it be real in any form? It witnesses to God the
Father's hatred of His Son, the sinfulness He sees in him, and His
insane desire for revenge and death. Can such projections be attested
to? Can they be anything but wholly false?

^2^ Pain is but witness to the Son's mistakes in what he thinks he is.
It is a dream of fierce retaliation for a crime that could not be
committed, for attack on what is wholly unassailable. It is a nightmare
of abandonment by an eternal Love which could not leave the Son whom it
created out of love.

^3^ Pain is a sign illusions reign in place of truth. It demonstrates
God is denied, confused with fear, perceived as mad, and seen as traitor
to Himself. If God is real, there is no pain. If pain is real, there is
no God. For vengeance is not part of love. And fear, denying love and
using pain to prove that God is dead, has shown that death is victor
over life. The body is the Son of God, corruptible in death, as mortal
as the Father he has slain.

^4^ Peace to such foolishness! The time has come to laugh at such insane
ideas. There is no need to think of them as savage crimes or secret sins
with weighty consequence. Who but a madman could conceive of them as
cause of anything? Their witness, pain, is mad as they and no more to be
feared than the insane illusions which it shields and tries to
demonstrate must still be true.

^5^ It is your thoughts alone that cause you pain. Nothing external to
your mind can hurt or injure you in any way. There is no cause beyond
yourself that can reach down and bring oppression. No one but yourself
affects you. There is nothing in the world which has the power to make
you ill or sad or weak or frail. But it is you who have the power to
dominate all things you see by merely recognizing what you are. As you
perceive the harmlessness in them, they will accept your holy will as
theirs. And what was seen as fearful now becomes a source of innocence
and holiness.

^6^ My holy brothers, think of this awhile-the world you see does
nothing. It has no effects at all. It merely represents your thoughts.
And it will change entirely as you elect to change your mind and choose
the joy of God as what you really want. Your Self is radiant in this
holy joy, unchanged, unchanging, and unchangeable forever and forever.
And would you deny a little corner of your mind its own inheritance and
keep it as a hospital for pain, a sickly place where living things must
come at last to die?

^7^ The world may seem to cause you pain. And yet the world, as
causeless, has no power to cause. As an effect, it cannot make effects.
As an illusion it is what you will. Your idle wishes represent its
pains. Your strange desires bring it evil dreams. Your thoughts of death
envelop it in fear, while in your kind forgiveness does it live.

^8^ Pain is the thought of evil taking form and working havoc in your
holy mind. Pain is the ransom you have gladly paid not to be free. In
pain is God denied the Son He loves. In pain does fear appear to triumph
over love and time replace eternity and Heaven. And the world becomes a
cruel and a bitter place, where sorrow rules and little joys give way
before the onslaught of the savage pain that waits to end all joy in
misery.

^9^ Lay down your arms and come without defense into the quiet place
where Heaven's peace holds all things still at last. Lay down all
thoughts of danger and of fear. Let no attack enter with you. Lay down
the cruel sword of judgment that you hold against your throat, and put
aside the withering assaults with which you seek to hide your holiness.
Here will you understand there is no pain. Here does the joy of God
belong to you.

^10^ This is the day when it is given you to realize the lesson which
contains all of salvation's power. It is this: pain is illusion; joy
reality. Pain is but sleep; joy is awakening. Pain is deception; joy
alone is truth.

^11^ And so again we make the only choice that ever can be made-we
choose between illusions and the truth, or pain and joy, or hell and
Heaven. Let our gratitude unto our Teacher fill our hearts as we are
free to choose our joy instead of pain, our holiness in place of sin,
the peace of God instead of conflict, and the light of Heaven for the
darkness of the world.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_022.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 191 I am the holy Son of God Himself**](#part0004.html#level-461) {#part0044_split_022.html#h1-461 .level1}

^1^ Here is your declaration of release from bondage of the world. And
here as well is all the world released. You do not see what you have
done by giving to the world the role of jailer to the Son of God. What
could it be but vicious and afraid, fearful of shadows, punitive and
wild, lacking all reason, blind, insane, and sad?

^2^ What have you done that this should be your world? What have you
done that this is what you see? Deny your own identity, and this is what
remains. You look on chaos and proclaim it as yourself. There is no
sight that fails to witness this to you. There is no sound that does not
speak of frailty within you and without, no breath you draw that does
not seem to bring you nearer death, no hope you hold but will dissolve
in tears.

^3^ Deny your own identity, and you will not escape the madness which
induced this weird, unnatural, and ghostly thought which mocks creation
and which laughs at God. Deny your own identity, and you assail the
universe alone, without a friend, a tiny particle of dust against the
legions of your enemies. Deny your own identity and look on evil, sin,
and death. And watch despair snatch from your fingers every scrap of
hope, leaving you nothing but the wish to die.

^4^ Yet what is it except a game you play in which identity can be
denied? You are as God created you. All else but this one thing is folly
to believe. In this one thought is everything set free. In this one
truth are all illusions gone. In this one fact is sinlessness proclaimed
to be forever part of everything, the central core of its existence, and
its guarantee of immortality.

^5^ But let today's idea find a place among your thoughts, and you have
risen far above the world and all the worldly thoughts that hold it
prisoner. And from this place of safety and escape, you will return and
set it free. For he who can accept his true identity is truly saved. And
his salvation is the gift he gives to everyone in gratitude to Him Who
pointed out the way to happiness that changed his whole perception of
the world.

^6^ One holy thought like this, and you are free; you are the holy Son
of God Himself. And with this holy thought, you learn as well that you
have freed the world. You have no need to use it cruelly and then
perceive this savage need in it. You set it free of your imprisonment.
You will not see a devastating image of yourself walking the world in
terror with the world twisting in agony because your fears have laid the
mark of death upon its heart.

^7^ Be glad today how very easily is hell undone. You need but tell
yourself:

*^8^ I am the holy Son of God Himself.\
I cannot suffer, cannot be in pain;\
I cannot lose, nor can I fail to do\
All that salvation asks.*

^9^ And in that thought is everything you look on wholly changed.

^10^ A miracle has lighted up all dark and ancient caverns where the
rites of death echoed since time began. For time has lost its hold upon
the world. The Son of God has come in glory to redeem the lost, to save
the helpless, and to give the world the gift of his forgiveness. Who
could see the world as dark and sinful when God's Son has come again at
last to set it free?

^11^ You who perceive yourself as weak and frail, with futile hopes and
devastated dreams, born but to die, to weep, and suffer pain, hear this:
all power is given you in earth and Heaven. There is nothing that you
cannot do. You play the game of death, of being helpless, pitifully tied
to dissolution in a world which shows no mercy to you. Yet when you
accord it mercy will its mercy shine on you.

^12^ Then let the Son of God awaken from his sleep, and opening his holy
eyes return again to bless the world he made. In error it began. But it
will end in the reflection of his holiness. And he will sleep no more
and dream of death. Then join with me today. Your glory is the light
that saves the world. Do not withhold salvation longer. Look about the
world, and see the suffering there. Is not your heart willing to bring
your weary brothers rest?

^13^ They must await your own release. They stay in chains till you are
free. They cannot see the mercy of the world until you find it for
yourself. They suffer pain until you have denied its hold on you. They
die till you accept your own eternal life. You are the holy Son of God
Himself. Remember this, and all the world is free. Remember this, and
earth and Heaven are one.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_023.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 192 I have a function God would have me fill**](#part0004.html#level-462) {#part0044_split_023.html#h1-462 .level1}

^1^ It is your Father's holy Will that you complete Himself and that
your Self shall be His sacred Son, forever pure as He, of love created
and in love preserved, extending love, creating in its name, forever one
with God and with your Self. Yet what can such a function mean within a
world of envy, hatred, and attack? Therefore you have a function in the
world in its own terms. For who can understand a language far beyond his
simple grasp?

^2^ Forgiveness represents your function here. It is not God's creation,
for it is the means by which untruth can be undone. And who would pardon
Heaven? Yet on earth you need the means to let illusion go. Creation
merely waits for your return to be acknowledged, not to be complete.

^3^ Creation cannot even be conceived of in the world. It has no meaning
here. Forgiveness is the closest it can come to earth. For being
Heaven-borne, it has no form at all. Yet God created One Who has the
power to translate into form the wholly formless. What He makes are
dreams, but of a kind so close to waking that the light of day already
shines in them. And eyes already opening behold the joyful sights their
offerings contain.

^4^ Forgiveness gently looks upon all things unknown in Heaven, sees
them disappear, and leaves the world a clean and unmarked slate on which
the Word of God can now replace the senseless symbols written there
before. Forgiveness is the means by which the fear of death is overcome
because it holds no fierce attraction now, and guilt is gone.

^5^ Forgiveness lets the body be perceived as what it is-a simple
teaching aid to be laid by when learning is complete, but hardly
changing him who learns at all. The mind without the body cannot make
mistakes. It cannot think that it will die nor be the prey of merciless
attack. Anger becomes impossible, and where is terror then? What fears
could still assail those who have lost the source of all attack, the
core of anguish, and the seat of fear?

^6^ Only forgiveness can relieve the mind of thinking that the body is
its home. Only forgiveness can restore the peace that God intended for
His holy Son. Only forgiveness can persuade the Son to look again upon
his holiness. With anger gone, you will indeed perceive that for
Christ's vision and the gift of sight no sacrifice was asked, and only
pain was lifted from a sick and tortured mind.

^7^ Is this unwelcome? Is it to be feared? Or is it to be hoped for, met
with thanks, and joyously accepted? We are one and therefore give up
nothing. But we have indeed been given everything by God. Yet do we need
forgiveness to perceive that this is so. Without its kindly light we
grope in darkness, using reason but to justify our rage and our attack.
Our understanding is so limited that what we think we understand is but
confusion born of error. We are lost in mists of shifting dreams and
fearful thoughts, our eyes shut tight against the light, our minds
engaged in worshipping what is not there.

^8^ Who can be born again in Christ but him who has forgiven everyone he
sees or thinks of or imagines? Who could be set free while he imprisons
anyone? A jailer is not free, for he is bound together with his
prisoner. He must be sure that he does not escape, and so he spends his
time in keeping watch on him. The bars which limit him become the world
in which the jailer lives, along with him. And it is on his freedom that
the way to liberty depends for both of them.

^9^ Therefore hold no one prisoner. Release instead of bind, for thus
are you made free. The way is simple. Every time you feel a stab of
anger, realize you hold a sword above your head. And it will fall or be
averted as you choose to be condemned or free. Thus does each one who
seems to tempt you to be angry represent your savior from the
prison-house of death. And so you owe him thanks instead of pain.

^10^ Be merciful today. The Son of God deserves your mercy. It is he who
asks that you accept the way to freedom now. Deny him not. His Father's
Love for him belongs to you. Your function here on earth is only to
forgive him, that you may accept him back as your identity. He is as God
created him. And you are what he is. Forgive him now his sins, and you
will see that you are one with him.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_024.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 193 All things are lessons God would have me learn**](#part0004.html#level-463) {#part0044_split_024.html#h1-463 .level1}

^1^ God does not know of learning. Yet His Will extends to what He does
not understand in that He wills the happiness His Son inherited of Him
be undisturbed, eternal and forever gaining scope, eternally expanding
in the joy of full creation, and eternally open and wholly limitless in
Him. This is His Will. And thus His Will provides the means to guarantee
that it is done.

^2^ God sees no contradictions. Yet His Son believes he sees them. Thus
he has a need for One Who can correct his erring sight and give him
vision that will lead him back to where perception ceases. God does not
perceive at all. Yet it is He Who gives the means by which perception is
made true and beautiful enough to let the light of Heaven shine upon it.
It is He Who answers what His Son would contradict and keeps his
sinlessness forever safe.

^3^God offers no forgiveness, for He knows no sin is possible. And yet
He let His holy law of Love be given form in which it could be offered
to the world. And He created One Who could perceive what form this law
should take, to be received by every mind which had forgotten it as it
exists in Heaven and in God. Thus He encouraged what He could not see
nor understand by giving of His Love and making Answer to a question
which, though meaningless, His Son had asked of Him.

^4^ The One Whom God created to replace the foolish thoughts which crept
into the mind of His most holy Son with peace and joy fulfills His
function now. He redirects each lesson you would teach in hate to one in
which forgiveness enters, and returns the hate to love, so that the fear
is gone. And now guilt cannot enter, for its source has been excluded as
the purpose of the lesson has been changed to guiltlessness; the hatred
has been rooted out by love.

^5^ These are the lessons God would have you learn. His Will reflects
them all, and they reflect His loving kindness to the Son He loves. Each
lesson has a central thought, the same in all of them. The form alone is
changed, with different circumstances and events, with different
characters and different themes apparent but not real. They are the same
in fundamental content. It is this:

*^6^ Forgive and you will see this differently**.***

^7^ Certain it is that all distress does not appear to be but
unforgiveness. Yet that is the content underneath the form. It is this
sameness which makes learning sure because the lesson is so simple that
it cannot be rejected in the end. No one can hide forever from a truth
so very obvious that it appears in countless forms and yet is recognized
as easily in all of them if one but wants to see the simple lesson
there.

*^8^ Forgive and you will see this differently.*

^9^ These are the words the Holy Spirit speaks in all your tribulations,
all your pain, all suffering regardless of its forms. These are the
words with which temptation ends and guilt, abandoned, is revered no
more. These are the words which end the dream of sin and rid the mind of
fear. These are the words by which salvation comes to all the world.

^10^ Shall we not learn to say these words when we are tempted to
believe that pain is real and death becomes our choice instead of life?
Shall we not learn to say these words when we have understood their
power to release all minds from bondage? These are words which give you
power over all events which seem to have been given power over you. You
see them rightly when you hold these words in full awareness, and do not
forget these words apply to everything you see or any brother looks upon
amiss.

^11^ How can you tell when you are seeing wrong or someone else is
failing to perceive the lesson he should learn? Does pain seem real in
the perception? If it does, be sure the lesson is not learned. And there
remains an unforgiveness hiding in the mind which sees the pain through
eyes the mind directs.

^12^ God would not have you suffer thus. He would help you forgive
yourself. His Son does not remember who he is. And God would have him
not forget His Love and all the gifts His Love brings with it. Would you
now renounce your own salvation? Would you fail to learn the simple
lessons Heaven's Teacher sets before you that all pain may disappear and
God may be remembered by His Son?

^13^ All things are lessons God would have you learn. He would not leave
an unforgiving thought without correction nor one thorn or nail to hurt
His sacred Son in any way. He would ensure his holy rest remain
untroubled and serene, without a care in an eternal home which cares for
him. And He would have all tears be wiped away with none remaining yet
unshed and none but waiting their appointed time to fall. For God has
willed that laughter should replace each one and that His Son be free
again.

^14^ We will attempt today to overcome a thousand seeming obstacles to
peace in just one day. Let mercy come to you more quickly. Do not try to
hold it off another day, another minute, or another instant. Time was
made for this. Use it today for what its purpose is. Morning and night,
devote what time you can to serve its proper aim, and do not let the
time be less than meets your deepest need.

^15^ Give all you can and give a little more, for now we would arise in
haste and go unto our Father's house. We have been gone too long, and we
would linger here no more. And as we practice, let us think about all
things we saved to settle by ourselves and kept apart from healing. Let
us give them all to Him Who knows the way to look upon them so that they
will disappear. Truth is His message; truth His teaching is. His are the
lessons God would have us learn.

^16^ Each hour spend a little time today, and in the days to come, in
practicing the lesson in forgiveness in the form established for the
day. And try to give it application to the happenings the hour brought,
so that the next one is free of the one before. The chains of time are
easily unloosened in this way.

^17^ Let no one hour cast its shadow on the one that follows, and when
that one goes, let everything that happens in its course go with it.
Thus will you remain unbound, in peace eternal in the world of time.
This is the lesson God would have you learn: there is a way to look on
everything that lets it be to you another step to Him and to salvation
of the world.

^18^ To all that speaks of terror, answer thus:

*^19^ I will forgive and this will disappear.*

^20^ To every apprehension, every care, and every form of suffering,
repeat these selfsame words. And then you hold the key that opens
Heaven's gate and brings the Love of God the Father down to earth at
last, to raise it up to Heaven. God will take this final step Himself.
Do not deny the little steps He asks you take to Him.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_025.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 194 I place the future in the Hands of God**](#part0004.html#level-464) {#part0044_split_025.html#h1-464 .level1}

^1^ Today's idea takes another step toward quick salvation, and a giant
stride it is indeed! So great the distance is that it encompasses, it
sets you down just short of Heaven, with the goal in sight and obstacles
behind. Your foot has reached the lawns that welcome you to Heaven's
gate, the quiet place of peace where you await with certainty the final
step of God. How far are we progressing now from earth! How close are we
approaching to our goal! How short the journey still to be pursued!

^2^ Accept today's idea, and you have passed all anxiety, all pits of
hell, all blackness of depression, thoughts of sin, and devastation
brought about by guilt. Accept today's idea, and you have released the
world from all imprisonment by loosening the heavy chains that locked
the door to freedom on it. You are saved, and your salvation thus
becomes the gift you give the world because you have received.

^3^ In no one instant is depression felt or pain experienced or loss
perceived. In no one instant sorrow can be set upon a throne and
worshipped faithfully. In no one instant can one even die. And so each
instant given unto God in passing, with the next one given Him already,
is a time of your release from sadness, pain and even death itself.

^4^ God holds your future as He holds your past and present. They are
one to Him, and so they should be one to you. Yet in this world the
temporal progression still seems real. And so you are not asked to
understand the lack of sequence really found in time. You are but asked
to let the future go and place it in God's hands. And you will see by
your experience that you have laid the past and present in His hands as
well because the past will punish you no more and future dread will now
be meaningless.

^5^ Release the future. For the past is gone, and what is present, freed
from its bequest of grief and misery, of pain and loss, becomes the
instant in which time escapes the bondage of illusions where it runs its
pitiless, inevitable course. Then is each instant, which was slave to
time, transformed into a holy instant when the light that was kept
hidden in God's Son is freed to bless the world. Now is he free, and all
his glory shines upon a world made free with him to share his holiness.

^6^ If you can see the lesson for today as the deliverance it really is,
you will not hesitate to give as much consistent effort as you can to
make it be a part of you. As it becomes a thought which rules your mind,
a habit in your problem-solving repertoire, a way of quick reaction to
temptation, you extend your learning to the world. And as you learn to
see salvation in all things, so will the world perceive that it is
saved.

^7^ What worry can beset the one who gives his future to the loving
hands of God? What can he suffer? What can cause him pain or bring
experience of loss to him? What can he fear? And what can he regard
except with love? For he who has escaped all fear of future pain has
found his way to present peace and certainty of care the world can never
threaten. He is sure that his perception may be faulty but will never
lack correction. He is free to choose again when he has been deceived,
to change his mind when he has made mistakes.

^8^ Place, then, your future in the hands of God. For thus you call the
memory of Him to come again, replacing all your thoughts of sin and evil
with the truth of love. Think you the world could fail to gain thereby
and every living creature not respond with healed perception? Who
entrusts himself to God has also placed the world within the hands to
which he has himself appealed for comfort and security. He lays aside
the sick illusions of the world along with his and offers peace to both.

^9^ Now are we saved indeed. For in God's hands we rest untroubled, sure
that only good can come to us. If we forget, we will be gently
reassured. If we accept an unforgiving thought, it will be soon replaced
by love's reflection. And if we are tempted to attack, we will appeal to
Him Who guards our rest to make the choice for us that leaves temptation
far behind. No longer is the world our enemy, for we have chosen that we
be its friends.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_026.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 195 Love is the way I walk in gratitude**](#part0004.html#level-465) {#part0044_split_026.html#h1-465 .level1}

^1^ Gratitude is a lesson hard to learn for those who look upon the
world amiss. The most that they can do is see themselves as better off
than others. And they try to be content because another seems to suffer
more than they. How pitiful and deprecating are such thoughts! For who
has cause for thanks while others have less cause, and who could suffer
less because he sees another suffer more? Your gratitude is due to Him
alone Who made all cause of sorrow disappear throughout the world.

^2^ It is insane to offer thanks because of suffering. But it is equally
insane to fail in gratitude to One Who offers you the certain means
whereby all pain is healed and suffering replaced with laughter and with
happiness. Nor could the even partly sane refuse to take the steps which
He directs and follow in the way He sets before them to escape a prison
that they thought contained no door to the deliverance they now
perceive.

^3^ Your brother is your "enemy" because you see in him the rival for
your peace, a plunderer who takes his joy from you and leaves you
nothing but a black despair so bitter and relentless that there is no
hope remaining. Now is vengeance all there is to wish for. Now can you
but try to bring him down to lie in death with you, as useless as
yourself, as little left within his grasping fingers as in yours.

^4^ You do not offer God your gratitude because your brother is more
slave than you, nor could you sanely be enraged if he seems freer. Love
makes no comparisons. And gratitude can only be sincere if it is joined
to love. We offer thanks to God our Father that in us all things will
find their freedom. It will never be that some are loosed while others
still are bound, for who can bargain in the name of love?

^5^ Therefore give thanks, but in sincerity. And let your gratitude make
room for all who will escape with you-the sick, the weak, the needy and
afraid, and those who mourn a seeming loss or feel apparent pain, who
suffer cold or hunger, or who walk the way of hatred and the path of
death. All these go with you. Let us not compare ourselves with them,
for thus we split them off in our awareness from the unity we share with
them, as they must share with us.

^6^ We thank our Father for one thing alone-that we are separate from no
living thing and therefore one with Him. And we rejoice that no
exceptions ever can be made which would reduce our wholeness nor impair
or change our function to complete the One Who is Himself completion. We
give thanks for every living thing, for otherwise we offer thanks for
nothing and we fail to recognize the gifts of God to us.

^7^ Then let our brothers lean their tired heads against our shoulders
as they rest a while. We offer thanks for them. For if we can direct
them to the peace that we would find, the way is opening at last to us.
An ancient door is swinging free again; a long forgotten Word re-echoes
in our memory and gathers clarity as we are willing once again to hear.

^8^ Walk then in gratitude, the way of love. For hatred is forgotten
when we lay comparisons aside. What more remains as obstacles to peace?
The fear of God is now undone at last, and we forgive without comparing.
Thus we cannot choose to overlook some things and yet retain some other
things still locked away as sins. When your forgiveness is complete, you
will have total gratitude, for you will see that everything has earned
the right to love by being loving, even as your Self.

^9^ Today we learn to think of gratitude in place of anger, malice, and
revenge. We have been given everything. If we refuse to recognize it, we
are not entitled therefore to our bitterness and to a self-perception
which regards us in a place of merciless pursuit where we are badgered
ceaselessly and pushed about without a thought or care for us or for our
future. Gratitude becomes the single thought we substitute for these
insane perceptions. God has cared for us and calls us Son. Can there be
more than this?

^10^ Our gratitude will pave the way to Him and shorten our learning
time by more than you could ever dream of. Gratitude goes hand in hand
with love, and where one is, the other must be found. For gratitude is
but an aspect of the love which is the Source of all creation. God gives
thanks to you, His Son, for being what you are-His own completion and
the source of love, along with Him. Your gratitude to Him is one with
His to you. For love can walk no road except the way of gratitude, and
thus we go who walk the way to God.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_027.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 196 It can be but myself I crucify**](#part0004.html#level-466) {#part0044_split_027.html#h1-466 .level1}

^1^ When this is firmly understood and kept in full awareness, you will
not attempt to harm yourself nor make your body slave to vengeance. You
will not attack yourself, and you will realize that to attack another is
but to attack yourself. You will be free of the insane belief that to
attack a brother saves yourself. And you will understand his safety is
your own, and in his healing you are healed.

^2^ Perhaps at first you will not understand how mercy, limitless and
with all things held in its sure protection, can be found in the idea we
practice for today. It may in fact appear to be a sign that punishment
can never be escaped because the ego, under what it sees as threat, is
quick to cite the truth to save its lies. Yet must it fail to understand
the truth it uses thus. But you can learn to see these foolish
applications and deny the meaning they appear to have.

^3^ Thus do you also teach your mind that you are not an ego. For the
ways in which the ego would distort the truth will not deceive you
longer. You will not believe you are a body to be crucified. And you
will see within today's idea the light of resurrection, looking past all
thoughts of crucifixion and of death to thoughts of liberation and of
life.

^4^ Today's idea is one step we take in leading us from bondage to the
state of perfect freedom. Let us take this step today that we may
quickly go the way salvation shows us, taking every step in its
appointed sequence as the mind relinquishes its burdens one by one. It
is not time we need for this. It is but willingness. For what would seem
to need a thousand years can easily be done in just one instant by the
grace of God.

^5^ The dreary, hopeless thought that you can make attacks on others and
escape yourself has nailed you to the cross. Perhaps it seemed to be
salvation. Yet it merely stood for the belief the fear of God is real.
And what is that but hell? Who could believe his Father is his deadly
enemy, separate from him and waiting to destroy his life and blot him
from the universe, without the fear of hell upon his heart?

^6^ Such is the form of madness you believe if you accept the fearful
thought you can attack another and be free yourself. Until this form is
changed, there is no hope. Until you see that this, at least, must be
entirely impossible, how could there be escape? The fear of God is real
to anyone who thinks this thought is true. And he will not perceive its
foolishness nor even see that it is there so that it would be possible
to question it.

^7^ To question it at all, its form must first be changed at least as
much as will permit fear of retaliation to abate and the responsibility
returned to some extent to you. From there you can at least consider if
you want to go along this painful path. Until this shift has been
accomplished, you cannot perceive that it is but your thoughts that
bring you fear and your deliverance depends on you.

^8^ Our next steps will be easy if you take this one today. From there
we go ahead quite rapidly. For once you understand it is impossible that
you be hurt except by your own thoughts, the fear of God must disappear.
You do not now believe that fear is caused without. And God, Whom you
had thought to banish, can be welcomed back within the holy mind He
never left.

^9^ Salvation's song can certainly be heard in the idea we practice for
today. If it can but be you you crucify, you did not hurt the world and
need not fear its vengeance and pursuit. Nor need you hide in terror
from the deadly fear of God projection hides behind. The thing you dread
the most is your salvation. You are strong, and it is strength you want.
And you are free and glad of freedom. You have sought to be both weak
and bound because you feared your strength and freedom. Yet salvation
lies in them.

^10^ There is an instant in which terror seems to grip your mind so
wholly that escape appears quite hopeless. When you realize once and for
all that it is you you fear, the mind perceives itself as split. And
this had been concealed while you believed attack could be directed
outward and returned from outside to within. It seemed to be an enemy
outside you had to fear. And thus a god outside yourself became your
mortal enemy-the source of fear.

^11^ Now for an instant is a murderer perceived within you, eager for
your death, intent on plotting punishment for you until the time when it
can kill at last. Yet in this instant is the time as well in which
salvation comes. For fear of God has disappeared. And you can call on
Him to save you from illusions in His Love, calling Him Father and
yourself His Son. Pray that the instant may be soon-today. Step back
from fear and make advance to love.

^12^ There is no Thought of God that does not go with you to help you
reach that instant and to go beyond it quickly, surely, and forever.
When the fear of God is gone, there are no obstacles that still remain
between you and the holy peace of God. How kind and merciful is the idea
we practice! Give it welcome, as you should, for it is your release. It
is indeed but you your mind can try to crucify. Yet your redemption,
too, will come from you.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_028.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 197 It can be but my gratitude I earn**](#part0004.html#level-467) {#part0044_split_028.html#h1-467 .level1}

^1^ Here is the second step we take to free your mind from the belief in
outside force pitted against your own. You make attempts at kindness and
forgiveness. Yet you turn them to attack again unless you find external
gratitude and lavish thanks. Your gifts must be received with honor,
lest they be withdrawn. And so you think God's gifts are loans at best;
at worst, deceptions which would cheat you of defenses to ensure that
when He strikes He will not fail to kill.

^2^ How easily are God and guilt confused by those who know not what
their thoughts can do. Deny your strength, and weakness must become
salvation to you. See yourself as bound, and bars become your home. Nor
will you leave the prison house or claim your strength until guilt and
salvation are not seen as one and freedom and salvation are perceived as
joined, with strength beside them, to be sought and claimed and found
and fully recognized.

^3^ The world must thank you when you offer it release from your
illusions. Yet your thanks belong to you as well, for its release can
only mirror yours. Your gratitude is all your gifts require that they be
a lasting offering of a thankful heart released from hell forever. Is it
this you would undo by taking back your gifts because they were not
honored? It is you who honor them and give them fitting thanks, for it
is you who have received the gifts.

^4^ It does not matter if another thinks your gifts unworthy. In his
mind there is a part that joins with yours in thanking you. It does not
matter if your gifts seem lost and ineffectual. They are received where
they are given. In your gratitude are they accepted universally and
thankfully acknowledged by the Heart of God Himself. And would you take
them back when He has gratefully accepted them?

^5^ God blesses every gift you give to Him and every gift is given Him
because it can be given only to yourself, and what belongs to God must
be His own. Yet you will never realize His gifts are sure, eternal,
changeless, limitless, forever giving out, extending love, and adding to
your never-ending joy, while you forgive but to attack again.

^6^ Withdraw the gifts you give, and you will think that what is given
you has been withdrawn. But learn to let forgiveness take away the sins
you think you see outside yourself, and you can never think the gifts of
God are lent but for a little while before He snatches them away again
in death. For death will have no meaning for you then.

^7^ And with the end of this belief is fear forever over. Thank your
Self for this, for He is grateful only unto God, and He gives thanks for
you unto Himself. To everyone who lives will Christ yet come, for
everyone must live and breathe in Him. His Being in His Father is secure
because Their Will is one. Their gratitude to all They have created has
no end, for gratitude remains a part of love.

^8^ Thanks be to you, the holy Son of God, for as you were created you
contain all things within your Self. And you are still as God created
you. Nor can you dim the light of your perfection. In your heart, the
Heart of God is laid. He holds you dear because you are Himself. All
gratitude belongs to you because of what you are.

^9^ Give thanks as you receive it. Be you free of all ingratitude to
anyone who makes your Self complete. And from this Self is no one left
outside. Give thanks for all the countless channels which extend this
Self. All that you do is given unto Him. All that you think can only be
His Thoughts, sharing with Him the holy Thoughts of God. Earn now the
gratitude you have denied yourself when you forgot the function God has
given you. But never think that He has ever ceased to offer thanks to
you.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_029.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 198 Only my condemnation injures me**](#part0004.html#level-468) {#part0044_split_029.html#h1-468 .level1}

^1^ Injury is impossible. And yet illusion makes illusion. If you can
condemn, you can be injured. For you have believed that you can injure,
and the right you have established for yourself can be now used against
you till you lay it down as valueless, unwanted, and unreal. Then does
illusion cease to have effects, and all it seemed to have will be
undone. Then are you free, for freedom is your gift, and you can now
receive the gift you gave.

^2^ Condemn and you are made a prisoner. Forgive and you are freed. Such
is the law that rules perception. It is not a law that knowledge
understands, for freedom is a part of knowledge. To condemn is thus
impossible in truth. What seems to be its influence and its effects have
not occurred at all. Yet must we deal with them a while as if they had.
Illusion makes illusion. Except one. Forgiveness is illusion that is
answer to the rest.

^3^ Forgiveness sweeps all other dreams away, and though it is itself a
dream, it breeds no others. All illusions save this one must multiply a
thousand fold. But this is where illusions end. Forgiveness is the end
of dreams because it is a dream of waking. It is not itself the truth.
Yet does it point to where the truth must be and gives direction with
the certainty of God Himself. It is a dream in which the Son of God
awakens to his Self and to his Father, knowing They are one.

^4^ Forgiveness is the only road that leads out of disaster, past all
suffering, and finally away from death. How could there be another way,
when this one is the plan of God Himself? And why would you oppose it,
quarrel with it, seek to find a thousand ways in which it must be wrong,
a thousand other possibilities?

^5^ Is it not wiser to be glad you hold the answer to your problems in
your hand? Is it not more intelligent to thank the One Who gives
salvation, and accept His gift with gratitude? And is it not a kindness
to yourself to hear His Voice and learn the simple lessons He would
teach, instead of trying to dismiss His Words and substitute your own in
place of His?

^6^ His Words will work. His Words will save. His Words contain all
hope, all blessing and all joy that ever can be found upon this earth.
His Words are born in God, and come to you with Heaven's love upon them.
Those who hear His Words have heard the song of Heaven, for these are
the words which all merge as one at last. And as this one will fade
away, the Word of God will come to take its place, for it will be
remembered then and loved.

^7^ This world has many seeming separate haunts where mercy has no
meaning and attack appears as justified. Yet all are one-a place where
death is offered to God's Son and to his Father. You may think They have
accepted, but if you will look again upon the place where you beheld
Their blood, you will perceive a miracle instead.

^8^ How foolish to believe that They could die! How foolish to believe
you can attack! How mad to think that you could be condemned and that
the holy Son of God can die! The stillness of your Self remains unmoved,
untouched by thoughts like these, and unaware of any condemnation which
could need forgiveness. Dreams of any kind are strange and alien to the
truth. Yet what but Truth could have a Thought which builds a bridge to
truth which brings illusions to the other side?

^9^ Today we practice letting freedom come to make its home with you.
The truth bestows these words upon your mind that you may find the key
to light and let the darkness end:

*^10^ Only my condemnation injures me.\
Only my own forgiveness sets me free.*

^11^ Do not forget today that there can be no form of suffering that
fails to hide an unforgiving thought. Nor can there be a form of pain
forgiveness cannot heal.

^12^ Accept the one illusion which proclaims there is no condemnation in
God's Son, and Heaven is remembered instantly; the world forgotten, all
its weird beliefs forgotten with it, as the face of Christ appears
unveiled at last in this one dream. This is the gift the Holy Spirit
holds for you from God your Father. Let today be celebrated both on
earth and in your holy home as well. Be kind to both, as you forgive the
trespasses you thought them guilty of, and see your innocence shining
upon you from the face of Christ.

^13^ Now is there silence all around the world. Now is there stillness
where before there was a frantic rush of thoughts that made no sense.
Now is there tranquil light across the face of earth, made quiet in a
dreamless sleep. And now the Word of God alone remains upon it. Only
that can be perceived an instant longer. Then are symbols done and
everything you ever thought you made completely vanished from the mind
which God forever knows to be His only Son.

^14^ There is no condemnation in him. He is perfect in his holiness. He
needs no thoughts of mercy. Who could give him gifts when everything is
his? And who could dream of offering forgiveness to the Son of
Sinlessness Itself, so like to Him Whose Son he is, that to behold the
Son is to perceive no more and only know the Father? In this vision of
the Son, so brief that not an instant stands between this single sight
and timelessness itself, you see the vision of yourself and then you
disappear forever into God.

^15^ Today we come still nearer to the end of everything that yet would
stand between this vision and our sight. And we are glad that we have
come this far and recognize that He Who brought us here will not forsake
us now. For He would give to us the gift that God has given us through
Him today. Now is the time of your deliverance. The time has come. The
time has come today.
:::

[]{#part0044_split_030.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 199 I am not a body. I am free**](#part0004.html#level-469) {#part0044_split_030.html#h1-469 .level1}

^1^ Freedom must be impossible as long as you perceive a body as
yourself. The body is a limit. Who would seek for freedom in a body
looks for it where it can not be found. The mind can be made free when
it no longer sees itself as in a body, firmly tied to it and sheltered
by its presence. If this were the truth, the mind were vulnerable
indeed!

^2^ The mind that serves the Holy Spirit is unlimited forever, in all
ways, beyond the laws of time and space, unbound by any preconceptions,
and with strength and power to do whatever it is asked. Attack thoughts
cannot enter such a mind because it has been given to the Source of
Love. And fear can never enter in a mind that has attached itself to
Love. It rests in God, and who can be afraid who lives in Innocence and
only loves?

^3^ It is essential for your progress in this course that you accept
today's idea and hold it very dear. Be not concerned that to the ego it
is quite insane. The ego holds the body dear because it dwells in it and
lives united with the home that it has made. It is a part of the
illusion that has sheltered it from being found illusory itself.

^4^ Here does it hide, and here it can be seen as what it is. Declare
your innocence, and you are free. The body disappears because you have
no need of it except the need the Holy Spirit sees. For this, the body
will appear as useful form for what the mind must do. It thus becomes a
vehicle which helps forgiveness be extended to the all-inclusive goal
that it must reach according to God's plan.

^5^ Cherish today's idea, and practice it today and every day. Make it a
part of every practice period you take. There is no thought that will
not gain thereby in power to help the world, and none which will not
gain in added gifts to you as well. We sound the call of freedom round
the world with this idea. And would you be exempt from the acceptance of
the gifts you give?

^6^ The Holy Spirit is the home of minds that seek for freedom. In Him
they find what they have sought. The body's purpose now is unambiguous.
And it becomes perfect in the ability to serve an undivided goal. In
conflict-free and unequivocal response to mind with but the thought of
freedom as its goal, the body serves, and serves its purpose well.
Without the power to enslave, it is a worthy servant of the freedom
which the mind within the Holy Spirit seeks.

^7^ Be free today, and carry freedom as your gift to those who still
believe they are enslaved within a body. Be you free, so that the Holy
Spirit can make use of your escape from bondage to set free the many who
perceive themselves as bound and helpless and afraid. Let love replace
their fears through you. Accept salvation now, and give your mind to Him
Who calls to you to make this gift to Him. For He would give you perfect
freedom, perfect joy, and hope that finds its full accomplishment in
God.

^8^ You are God's Son. In immortality you live forever. Would you not
return your mind to this? Then practice well the thought the Holy Spirit
gives you for today. Your brothers stand released with you in it; the
world is blessed along with you; God's Son will weep no more, and Heaven
offers thanks for the increase of joy your practice brings even to it.
And God Himself extends His Love and happiness each time you say:

*^9^ I am not a body. I am free.\
I hear the Voice that God has given me,\
And it is only this my mind obeys.*
:::

[]{#part0044_split_031.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 200 There is no peace except the peace of God**](#part0004.html#level-470) {#part0044_split_031.html#h1-470 .level1}

^1^ Seek you no further. You will not find peace except the peace of
God. Accept this fact, and save yourself the agony of yet more bitter
disappointments, bleak despair, and sense of icy hopelessness and doubt.
Seek you no further. There is nothing else for you to find except the
peace of God, unless you seek for misery and pain.

^2^ This is the final point to which each one must come at last, to lay
aside all hope of finding happiness where there is none, of being saved
by what can only hurt, of making peace of chaos, joy of pain and Heaven
out of hell. Attempt no more to win through losing nor to die to live.
You cannot but be asking for defeat.

^3^ Yet you can ask as easily for love, for happiness, and for eternal
life in peace that has no ending. Ask for this, and you can only win. To
ask for what you have already must succeed. To ask that what is false be
true can only fail. Forgive yourself for vain imaginings, and seek no
longer what you cannot find. For what could be more foolish than to seek
and seek and seek again for hell, when you have but to look with open
eyes to find that Heaven lies before you, through a door that opens
easily to welcome you?

^4^ Come home. You have not found your happiness in foreign places and
in alien forms which have no meaning to you, though you sought to make
them meaningful. This world is not where you belong. You are a stranger
here. But it is given you to find the means whereby the world no longer
seems to be a prison house for you or anyone.

^5^ Freedom is given you where you beheld but chains and iron doors. For
you must change your mind about the purpose of the world if you would
find escape. You will be bound till all the world is seen by you as
blessed and everyone made free of your mistakes and honored as he is.
You made him not; no more yourself. And as you free the one, the other
is accepted as he is.

^6^ What does forgiveness do? In truth it has no function and does
nothing, for it is unknown in Heaven. It is only hell where it is needed
and where it must serve a mighty function. Is not the escape of God's
beloved Son from evil dreams that he imagines, yet believes are true, a
worthy purpose? Who could hope for more while there appears to be a
choice to make between success and failure, love and fear?

^7^ There is no peace except the peace of God because He has one Son,
who cannot make a world in opposition to God's Will and to his own,
which is the same as His. What could he hope to find in such a world? It
cannot have reality because it never was created. Is it here that he
would seek for peace? Or must he see that, as he looks on it, the world
can but deceive? Yet can he learn to look on it another way and find the
peace of God.

^8^ Peace is the bridge that everyone will cross to leave this world
behind. But peace begins within the world perceived as different and
leading from this fresh perception to the gate of Heaven and the way
beyond. Peace is the answer to conflicting goals, to senseless journeys,
frantic, vain pursuits, and meaningless endeavors. Now the way is easy,
sloping gently toward the bridge where freedom lies within the peace of
God.

^9^ Let us not lose our way again today. We go to Heaven, and the path
is straight. Only if we attempt to wander can there be delay and
needless wasted time on thorny byways. God alone is sure, and He will
guide our footsteps. He will not desert His Son in need, nor let him
stray forever from his home. The Father calls; the Son will hear. And
that is all there is to what appears to be a world apart from God where
bodies have reality.

^10^ Now is there silence. Seek no further. You have come to where the
road is carpeted with leaves of false desires, fallen from the trees of
hopelessness you sought before. Now are they underfoot. And you look up
and on toward Heaven, with the body's eyes but serving for an instant
longer now. Peace is already recognized at last, and you can feel its
soft embrace surround your heart and mind with comfort and with love.

^11^ Today we seek no idols. Peace can not be found in them. The peace
of God is ours, and only this will we accept and want. Peace be to us
today. For we have found a simple, happy way to leave the world of
ambiguity and to replace our shifting goals and solitary dreams with
single purpose and companionship. For peace is union if it be of God. We
seek no further. We are close to home and draw still nearer every time
we say:

*^12^ There is no peace except the peace of God,\
And I am glad and thankful it is so.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Review VI**](#part0004.html#parta-6) {#part0045_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^R6:1^ For this review, we take but one idea each day and practice it as
often as is possible. Besides the time you give morning and evening,
which should not be less than 15 minutes, and the hourly remembrances
you make throughout the day, use the idea as often as you can between
them. Each of these ideas alone would be sufficient for salvation, if it
were learned truly. Each would be enough to give release to you and to
the world from every form of bondage and invite the memory of God to
come again.

^2^ With this in mind, we start our practicing in which we carefully
review the thoughts the Holy Spirit has bestowed on us in our last 20
lessons. Each contains the whole curriculum if understood, practiced,
accepted, and applied to all the seeming happenings throughout the day.
One is enough. But for that one, there must be no exceptions made. And
so we need to use them all and let them blend as one, as each
contributes to the whole we learn.

^3^ These practice sessions, like our last review, are centered round a
central theme with which we start and end each lesson. It is this:

*^4^ I am not a body. I am free.\
For I am still as God created me.*

^5^ The day begins and ends with this. And we repeat it every time the
hour strikes or we remember in between we have a function that
transcends the world we see. Beyond this and a repetition of the special
thought we practice for the day, no form of exercise is urged except a
deep relinquishment of everything that clutters up the mind and makes it
deaf to reason, sanity, and simple truth.

^6^ We will attempt to get beyond all words and special forms of
practicing for this review. For we attempt this time to reach a
quickened pace along a shorter path to the serenity and peace of God. We
merely close our eyes and then forget all that we thought we knew and
understood. For thus is freedom given us from all we did not know and
failed to understand.

^7^ There is but one exception to this lack of structuring. Permit no
idle thought to go unchallenged. If you notice one, deny its hold and
hasten to assure your mind that this is not what it would have. Then
gently let the thought which you denied be given up in sure and quick
exchange for the idea you practice for the day.

^8^ When you are tempted, hasten to proclaim your freedom from
temptation as you say:

*^9^ This thought I do not want. I choose instead....*

^10^ And then repeat the idea for the day, and let it take the place of
what you thought. Beyond such special applications of each day's idea,
we will add but a few formal expressions or specific thoughts to aid
your practicing. Instead we give these times of quiet to the Teacher Who
instructs in quiet, speaks of peace, and gives our thoughts whatever
meaning they may have.

^11^ To Him I offer this review for you. I place you in His charge and
let Him teach you what to do and say and think each time you turn to
Him. He will not fail to be available to you each time you call to Him
to help you. Let us offer Him the whole review we now begin, and let us
also not forget to Whom it has been given as we practice day by day,
advancing toward the goal He set for us, allowing Him to teach us how to
go, and trusting Him completely for the way each practice period can
best become a loving gift of freedom to the world.
:::

[]{#part0045_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 201 I am not a body. I am free. For I am still as God created me**](#part0004.html#level-471) {#part0045_split_001.html#h1-471 .level1}

\[181\] I trust my brothers, who are one with me.

*^1^ No one but is my brother. I am blessed\
with oneness with the universe and God,\
my Father, One Creator of the whole\
that is my Self, forever one with me.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 202**](#part0004.html#level-472) {#part0045_split_002.html#h1-472 .level1}

\[182\] I will be still a moment and go home.

*^1^ Why would I choose to stay an instant more\
where I do not belong, when God Himself\
has given me His Voice to call me home?*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 203**](#part0004.html#level-473) {#part0045_split_003.html#h1-473 .level1}

\[183\] I call upon God's Name and on my own.

*^1^ The Name of God is my deliverance\
from every thought of evil and of sin,\
because it is my own as well as His.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 204**](#part0004.html#level-474) {#part0045_split_004.html#h1-474 .level1}

\[184\] The Name of God is my inheritance.

*^1^ God's Name reminds me that I am His Son,\
not slave to time, unbound by laws which rule\
the world of sick illusions, free in God,\
forever and forever one with Him.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 205**](#part0004.html#level-475) {#part0045_split_005.html#h1-475 .level1}

\[185\] I want the peace of God.

*^1^ The peace of God is everything I want.\
The peace of God is my one goal; the aim\
of all my living here, the end I seek,\
my purpose and my function and my life\
while I abide where I am not at home.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 206**](#part0004.html#level-476) {#part0045_split_006.html#h1-476 .level1}

\[186\] Salvation of the world depends on me.

*^1^ I am entrusted with the gifts of God\
because I am His Son. And I would give\
His gifts where He intended them to be.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 207**](#part0004.html#level-477) {#part0045_split_007.html#h1-477 .level1}

\[187\] I bless the world because I bless myself.

*^1^ God's blessing shines upon me from within\
my heart where He abides. I need but turn\
to Him, and every sorrow melts away\
as I accept His boundless Love for me.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 208**](#part0004.html#level-478) {#part0045_split_008.html#h1-478 .level1}

\[188\] The peace of God is shining in me now.

*^1^ I will be still and let the earth be still\
along with me. And in that stillness, we\
will find the peace of God. It is within\
my heart, which witnesses to God Himself.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 209**](#part0004.html#level-479) {#part0045_split_009.html#h1-479 .level1}

\[189\] I feel the Love of God within me now.

*^1^ The Love of God is what created me.\
The Love of God is everything I am.\
The Love of God proclaimed me as His Son.\
The Love of God within me sets me free.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 210**](#part0004.html#level-480) {#part0045_split_010.html#h1-480 .level1}

\[190\] I choose the joy of God instead of pain.

*^1^ Pain is my own idea. It is not\
a thought of God, but one I thought apart\
from Him and from His Will. His Will is joy\
and only joy for His beloved Son.\
And that I choose instead of what I made.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_011.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 211**](#part0004.html#level-481) {#part0045_split_011.html#h1-481 .level1}

\[191\] I am the holy Son of God Himself.

*^1^ In silence and in true humility,\
I seek God's glory to behold it in\
the Son whom He created as my Self.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_012.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 212**](#part0004.html#level-482) {#part0045_split_012.html#h1-482 .level1}

\[192\] I have a function God would have me fill.

*^1^ I seek the function that would set me free\
from all the vain illusions of the world.\
Only the function God has given me\
can offer freedom. Only this I seek,\
and only this will I accept as mine.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_013.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 213**](#part0004.html#level-483) {#part0045_split_013.html#h1-483 .level1}

\[193\] All things are lessons God would have me learn.

*^1^ A lesson is a miracle which God\
offers to me in place of thoughts I made\
that hurt me. What I learn of Him becomes\
the way I am set free. And so I choose\
to learn His lessons and forget my own.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_014.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 214**](#part0004.html#level-484) {#part0045_split_014.html#h1-484 .level1}

\[194\] I place the future in the hands of God.

*^1^ The past is gone; the future is not yet.\
Now am I freed from both. For what God gives\
can only be for good. And I accept\
but what He gives as what belongs to me.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_015.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 215**](#part0004.html#level-485) {#part0045_split_015.html#h1-485 .level1}

\[195\] Love is the way I walk in gratitude.

*^1^ The Holy Spirit is my only Guide.\
He walks with me in love. And I give thanks\
to Him for showing me the way to go.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_016.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 216**](#part0004.html#level-486) {#part0045_split_016.html#h1-486 .level1}

\[196\] It can be but myself I crucify.

*^1^ All that I do, I do unto myself.\
If I attack, I suffer. But if I\
forgive, salvation will be given me.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_017.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 217**](#part0004.html#level-487) {#part0045_split_017.html#h1-487 .level1}

\[197\] It can be but my gratitude I earn.

*^1^ Who should give thanks for my salvation but\
myself? And how but through salvation can\
I find the Self to Whom my thanks are due?*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_018.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 218**](#part0004.html#level-488) {#part0045_split_018.html#h1-488 .level1}

\[198\] Only my condemnation injures me.

*^1^ My condemnation keeps my vision dark,\
and through my sightless eyes I cannot see\
the vision of my glory. Yet today\
I can behold this glory and be glad.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_019.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 219**](#part0004.html#level-489) {#part0045_split_019.html#h1-489 .level1}

\[199\] I am not a body. I am free.

*^1^ I am God's Son. Be still, my mind, and think\
a moment upon this. And then return\
to earth without confusion as to what\
my Father loves forever as His Son.*
:::

[]{#part0045_split_020.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 220**](#part0004.html#level-490) {#part0045_split_020.html#h1-490 .level1}

I am not a body. I am free.\
For I am still as God created me.

\[200\] There is no peace except the peace of God.

*^1^ Let me not wander from the way of peace,\
for I am lost on other roads than this.\
But let me follow Him Who leads me home,\
and peace is certain as the Love of God.*
:::

[]{#part0046.html}

::: {.body}
# [**PART II**](#part0004.html#part-2) {#part0046.html#Rpart-2 .toc-title}

^IP2:1^ Words will mean little now. We use them but as guides on which
we do not now depend. For now we seek direct experience of truth alone.
The lessons which remain are merely introductions to the times in which
we leave the world of pain and go to enter peace. Now we begin to reach
the goal this course has set and find the end toward which our
practicing was geared.

^2^ Now we attempt to let the exercise be merely a beginning. For we
wait in quiet expectation for our God and Father. He has promised He
will take the final step Himself. And we are sure His promises are kept.
We have come far along the road, and now we wait for Him. We will
continue spending time with Him each morning and at night, as long as
makes us happy. We will not consider time a matter of duration now. We
use as much as we will need for the result that we desire. Nor will we
forget our hourly remembrance in between, calling to God when we have
need of Him as we are tempted to forget our goal.

^3^ We will continue with a central thought for all the days to come.
And we will use that thought to introduce our times of rest and calm our
minds at need. Yet we will not content ourselves with simple practicing
in the remaining holy instants which conclude the year that we have
given God. We say some simple words of welcome and expect our Father to
reveal Himself as He has promised. We have called on Him, and He has
promised that His Son will not remain unanswered when he calls His Name.

^4^ Now do we come to Him with but His Word upon our minds and hearts.
And wait for Him to take the step to us that He has told us, through His
Voice, He would not fail to take when we invited Him. He has not left
His Son in all his madness nor betrayed His trust in him. Has not His
faithfulness earned Him the invitation that He seeks to make us happy?
We will offer it, and it will be accepted. So our times with Him will
now be spent. We say the words of invitation that His Voice suggests,
and then we wait for Him to come to us.

^5^ Now is the time of prophecy fulfilled. Now are all ancient promises
upheld and fully kept. No step remains for time to separate from its
accomplishment. For now we cannot fail. Sit silently and wait upon your
Father. He has willed to come to you when you have recognized it is your
will He do so. And you could have never come this far unless you saw,
however dimly, that it is your will.

^6^ I am so close to you we cannot fail. Father, we give these holy
times to You in gratitude to Him Who taught us how to leave the world of
sorrow in exchange for its replacement given us by You. We look not
backward now. We look ahead and fix our eyes upon the journey's end.
Accept these little gifts of thanks from us, as through Christ's vision
we behold a world beyond the one we made and take that world to be the
full replacement of our own.

^7^ And now we wait in silence, unafraid and certain of Your coming. We
have sought to find our way by following the Guide You sent to us. We
did not know the way, but You did not forget us. And we know that You
will not forget us now. We ask but that Your ancient promises be kept
which are Your Will to keep. We will with You in asking this. The Father
and the Son, Whose holy Will created all that is, can fail in nothing.
In this certainty, we undertake these last few steps to You and rest in
confidence upon Your Love, Which will not fail the Son who calls to You.

^8^ And so we start upon the final part of this one holy year which we
have spent together in the search for truth and God, Who is its one
Creator. We have found the way He chose for us and made the choice to
follow it as He would have us go. His hand has held us up. His Thoughts
have lit the darkness of our minds. His Love has called to us
unceasingly since time began.

^9^ We had a wish that God would fail to have the Son whom He created
for Himself. We wanted God to change Himself and be what we would make
of Him. And we believed that our insane desires were the truth. Now we
are glad that this is all undone, and we no longer think illusions true.
The memory of God is shimmering across the wide horizons of our minds. A
moment more, and it will rise again. A moment more, and we who are God's
Sons are safely home, where He would have us be.

^10^ Now is the need for practice almost done. For in this final section
we will come to understand that we need only call to God and all
temptations disappear. Instead of words, we need but feel His Love.
Instead of prayer, we need but call His Name. Instead of judging, we
need but be still and let all things be healed. We will accept the way
God's plan will end, as we received the way it started. Now it is
complete. This year has brought us to eternity.

^11^ One further use for words we still retain. From time to time,
instructions on a theme of special relevance will intersperse our daily
lessons and the periods of wordless, deep experience which should come
afterwards. These special thoughts should be reviewed each day, each one
of them to be continued till the next is given you. They should be
slowly read and thought about a little while, preceding one of the holy
and blessed instants in the day. We give the first of these instructions
now.
:::

[]{#part0047_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**1. W[HAT IS]{.small} F[ORGIVENESS]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-32) {#part0047_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST221:1^ Forgiveness recognizes what you thought your brother did to
you has not occurred. It does not pardon sins and make them real. It
sees there was no sin. And in this view are all your sins forgiven. What
is sin except a false idea about God's Son? Forgiveness merely sees its
falsity and therefore lets it go. What then is free to take its place is
now the Will of God.

^2^ An unforgiving thought is one which makes a judgment that it will
not raise to doubt, although it is not true. The mind is closed and will
not be released. The thought protects projection, tightening its chains
so that distortions are more veiled and more obscure, less easily
accessible to doubt, and further kept from reason. What can come between
a fixed projection and the aim that it has chosen as its needed goal?

^3^ An unforgiving thought does many things. In frantic action, it
pursues its goal, twisting and overturning what it sees as interfering
with its chosen path. Distortion is its purpose and the means by which
it would accomplish it as well. It sets about its furious attempts to
smash reality, without concern for anything that would appear to pose a
contradiction to its point of view.

^4^ Forgiveness, on the other hand, is still and quietly does nothing.
It offends no aspect of reality nor seeks to twist it to appearance that
it likes. It merely looks and waits and judges not. He who would not
forgive must judge, for he must justify his failure to forgive. But he
who would forgive himself must learn to welcome truth exactly as it is.

^5^ Do nothing, then, and let forgiveness show you what to do through
Him Who is your Guide, your Savior and Defender, strong in hope, and
certain of your ultimate success. He has forgiven you already, for such
is His function given Him by God. Now must you share His function and
forgive whom He has saved, whose sinlessness He sees, and whom He honors
as the Son of God.
:::

[]{#part0047_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 221 Peace to my mind. Let all my thoughts be still**](#part0004.html#level-491) {#part0047_split_001.html#h1-491 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I come to You today to seek the peace that You alone can
give. I come in silence. In the quiet of my heart, the deep recesses of
my mind, I wait and listen for Your Voice. My Father, speak to me today.
I come to hear Your Voice in silence and in certainty and love, sure You
will hear my call and answer me.*

^2^ Now do we wait in quiet. God is here because we wait together. I am
sure that He will speak to you, and you will hear. Accept my confidence,
for it is yours. Our minds are joined. We wait with one intent-to hear
our Father's answer to our call, to let our thoughts be still and find
His peace, to hear Him speak to us of what we are, and to reveal Himself
unto His Son.
:::

[]{#part0047_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 222 God is with me. I live and breathe in Him**](#part0004.html#level-492) {#part0047_split_002.html#h1-492 .level1}

^1^ God is with me. He is my Source of life, the life within, the air I
breathe, the food by which I am sustained, the water which renews and
cleanses me. He is my home, wherein I live and move, the Spirit Which
directs my actions, offers me Its Thoughts, and guarantees my safety
from all pain. He covers me with kindness and with care and holds in
love the Son He shines upon, who also shines on Him. How still is he who
knows the truth of what He speaks today!

*^2^ Father, we have no words except Your Name upon our lips and in our
minds as we come quietly into Your Presence now and ask to rest with You
in peace a while.*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 223 God is my life. I have no life but His**](#part0004.html#level-493) {#part0047_split_003.html#h1-493 .level1}

^1^ I was mistaken when I thought I lived apart from God, a separate
entity which moved in isolation, unattached, and housed within a body.
Now I know my life is God's. I have no other home, and I do not exist
apart from Him. He has no Thoughts that are not part of me, and I have
none but those which are of Him.

*^2^ Our Father, let us see the face of Christ instead of our mistakes.
For we who are Your holy Son are sinless. We would look upon our
sinlessness, for guilt proclaims that we are not Your Son. And we would
not forget You longer. We are lonely here and long for Heaven where we
are at home. Today we would return. Our Name is Yours, and we
acknowledge that we are Your Son.*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 224 God is my Father, and He loves His Son**](#part0004.html#level-494) {#part0047_split_004.html#h1-494 .level1}

^1^ My true identity is so secure, so lofty, sinless, glorious and
great, wholly beneficent and free from guilt that Heaven looks to it to
give it light. It lights the world as well. It is the gift my Father
gave me, the one as well I give the world. There is no gift but this
that can be either given or received. This is reality, and only this.
This is illusion's end. It is the Truth.

*^2^ My Name, oh Father, still is known to You. I have forgotten it and
do not know where I am going, who I am, or what it is I do. Remind me,
Father, now, for I am weary of the world I see. Reveal what You would
have me see instead.*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 225 God is my Father, and His Son loves Him**](#part0004.html#level-495) {#part0047_split_005.html#h1-495 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I must return Your Love for me. For giving and receiving
are the same, and You have given all Your Love to me. I must return it,
for I want it mine in full awareness, blazing in my mind, and keeping it
within its kindly light, inviolate-beloved, with fear behind and only
peace ahead. How still the way Your loving Son is led along to You!*

^2^ Brother, we find that stillness now. The way is open. Now we follow
it in peace together. You have reached your hand to me, and I will never
leave you. We are one, and it is but this oneness that we seek as we
accomplish these few final steps which end a journey that was not begun.
:::

[]{#part0047_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 226 My home awaits me. I will hasten there**](#part0004.html#level-496) {#part0047_split_006.html#h1-496 .level1}

^1^ If I so choose, I can depart this world entirely. It is not death
which makes this possible, but it is change of mind about the purpose of
the world. If I believe it has a value as I see it now, so will it still
remain for me. But if I see no value in the world as I behold it,
nothing that I want to keep as mine or search for as a goal, it will
depart from me. For I have not sought for illusions to replace the
truth.

*^2^ Father, my home awaits my glad return. Your arms are open, and I
hear Your Voice. What need have I to linger in a place of vain desires
and of broken dreams when Heaven can so easily be mine?*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 227 This is my holy instant of release**](#part0004.html#level-497) {#part0047_split_007.html#h1-497 .level1}

*^1^ Father, it is today that I am free because my will is Yours. I
thought to make another will. Yet nothing that I thought apart from You
exists. And I am free because I was mistaken and did not affect my own
reality at all by my illusions. Now I give them up and lay them down
before the feet of truth, to be removed forever from my mind. This is my
holy instant of release. Father, I know my will is one with Yours.*

^2^ And so today we find our glad return to Heaven, which we never
really left. The Son of God this day lays down his dreams. The Son of
God this day comes home again, released from sin and clad in holiness,
with his right mind restored to him at last.
:::

[]{#part0047_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 228 God has condemned me not. No more do I**](#part0004.html#level-498) {#part0047_split_008.html#h1-498 .level1}

^1^ My Father knows my holiness. Shall I deny His knowledge and believe
in what His knowledge makes impossible? Shall I accept as true what He
proclaims as false? Or shall I take His Word for what I am since He is
my Creator and the One Who knows the true condition of His Son?

*^2^ Father, I was mistaken in myself because I failed to realize the
Source from Which I came. I have not left that Source to enter in a body
and to die. My holiness remains a part of me, as I am part of You. And
my mistakes about myself are dreams. I let them go today. And I stand
ready to receive Your Word alone for what I really am.*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 229 Love, Which created me, is what I am**](#part0004.html#level-499) {#part0047_split_009.html#h1-499 .level1}

^1^ I seek my own identity and find it in these words: "Love, Which
created me, is what I am." Now need I seek no more. Love has prevailed.
So still it waited for my coming home that I will turn away no longer
from the holy face of Christ. And what I look upon attests the truth of
the identity I sought to lose, but which my Father has kept safe for me.

*^2^ Father, my thanks to You for what I am; for keeping my identity
untouched and sinless in the midst of all the thoughts of sin my foolish
mind made up. And thanks to You for saving me from them. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0047_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 230 Now will I seek and find the peace of God**](#part0004.html#level-500) {#part0047_split_010.html#h1-500 .level1}

^1^ In peace I was created. And in peace do I remain. It is not given me
to change my Self. How merciful is God my Father, that when He created
me He gave me peace forever. Now I ask but to be what I am. And can this
be denied me, when it is forever so?

*^2^ Father, I seek the peace You gave as mine in my creation. What was
given then must be here now, for my creation was apart from time and
still remains beyond all change. The peace in which Your Son was born
into Your Mind is shining there unchanged. I am as You created me. I
need but call on You to find the peace You gave. It is Your Will that
gave it to Your Son**.***
:::

[]{#part0048_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**2. W[HAT IS]{.small} S[ALVATION]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-33) {#part0048_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST231:1^Salvation is a promise made by God that you would find your way
to Him at last. It cannot not be kept. It guarantees that time will have
an end, and all the thoughts that have been born in time will end as
well. God's Word is given every mind which thinks that it has separate
thoughts and will replace these thoughts of conflict with the Thought of
peace.

^2^ The Thought of peace was given to God's Son the instant that his
mind had thought of war. There was no need for such a Thought before,
for peace was given without opposite and merely was. But when the mind
is split, there is a need of healing. So the Thought which has the power
to heal the split became a part of every fragment of the mind that still
was one but failed to recognize its oneness. Now it did not know itself
and thought its own identity was lost.

^3^ Salvation is undoing in the sense that it does nothing, failing to
support the world of dreams and malice. Thus it lets illusions go. By
not supporting them, it merely lets them quietly go down to dust. And
what they hid is now revealed-an altar to the holy Name of God whereon
His Word is written, with the gifts of your forgiveness laid before it
and the memory of God not far behind.

^4^ Let us come daily to this holy place and spend a while together.
Here we share our final dream. It is a dream in which there is no
sorrow, for it holds a hint of all the glory given us by God. The grass
is pushing through the soil, the trees are budding now, and birds have
come to live within their branches. Earth is being born again in new
perception. Night has gone, and we have come together in the light.

^5^ From here we give salvation to the world, for it is here salvation
was received. The song of our rejoicing is the call to all the world
that freedom is returned, that time is almost over, and God's Son has
but an instant more to wait until his Father is remembered, dreams are
done, eternity has shined away the world, and only Heaven now exists at
all.
:::

[]{#part0048_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 231 Father, I will but remember You**](#part0004.html#level-501) {#part0048_split_001.html#h1-501 .level1}

*^1^ What can I seek for, Father, but Your Love? Perhaps I think I seek
for something else-a something I have called by many names. Yet is Your
Love the only thing I seek or ever sought. For there is nothing else
that I could ever really want to find. Let me remember You. What else
could I desire but the truth about myself?*

^2^ This is your will, my brother. And you share this will with me, and
with the One as well Who is our Father. To remember Him is Heaven. This
we seek. And only this is what it will be given us to find.
:::

[]{#part0048_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 232 Be in my mind, my Father, through the day**](#part0004.html#level-502) {#part0048_split_002.html#h1-502 .level1}

*^1^ Be in my mind, my Father, when I wake and shine on me throughout
the day today. Let every minute be a time in which I dwell with You. And
let me not forget my hourly thanksgiving that You have remained with me
and always will be there to hear my call to You and answer me. As
evening comes, let all my thoughts be still of You and of Your Love, and
let me sleep sure of my safety, certain of Your care, and happily aware
I am Your Son.*

^2^ This is as every day should be. Today practice the end of fear. Have
faith in Him Who is your Father. Trust all things to Him. Let Him reveal
all things to you, and be you undismayed because you are His Son.
:::

[]{#part0048_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 233 I give my life to God to run today**](#part0004.html#level-503) {#part0048_split_003.html#h1-503 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I give You all my thoughts today. I would have none of
mine. In place of them, give me Your own. I give You all my acts as well
that I may do Your Will instead of seeking goals which cannot be
obtained and wasting time in vain imaginings. Today I come to You. I
will step back and merely follow You. Be You the Guide and I the
follower who questions not the wisdom of the Infinite nor Love Whose
tenderness I cannot comprehend but which is yet Your perfect gift to
me.*

^2^ Today we have one Guide to lead us on. And as we walk together, we
will give this day to Him with no reserve at all. This is His day. And
so it is a day of countless gifts and mercies unto us.
:::

[]{#part0048_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 234 Father, today I am Your Son again**](#part0004.html#level-504) {#part0048_split_004.html#h1-504 .level1}

^1^ Today we will anticipate the time when dreams of sin and guilt are
gone and we have reached again the holy place we never left. Merely a
tiny instant has elapsed between eternity and timelessness. So brief the
interval, there was no lapse in continuity nor break in thoughts which
are forever unified as one. Nothing has ever happened to disturb the
peace of God the Father and the Son. This we accept as wholly true
today.

*^2^ We thank You, Father, that we cannot lose the memory of You and of
Your Love. We recognize our safety and give thanks for all the gifts You
have bestowed on us, for all the loving help we have received, for Your
eternal patience, and the Word which You have given us that we are
saved.*
:::

[]{#part0048_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 235 God in His mercy wills that I be saved**](#part0004.html#level-505) {#part0048_split_005.html#h1-505 .level1}

^1^ I need but look upon all things that seem to hurt me and with
perfect certainty assure myself, "God wills that I be saved from this,"
and merely watch them disappear. I need but keep in mind my Father's
Will for me is only happiness to find that only happiness has come to
me. And I need but remember that His Love surrounds His Son and keeps
his sinlessness forever perfect to be sure that I am saved and safe
forever in His arms. I am the Son He loves. And I am saved because God
in His mercy wills it so.

*^2^ Father, Your holiness is mine. Your Love created me and made my
sinlessness forever part of You. I have no guilt nor sin in me, for
there is none in You.*
:::

[]{#part0048_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 236 I rule my mind, which I alone must rule**](#part0004.html#level-506) {#part0048_split_006.html#h1-506 .level1}

^1^ I have a kingdom I must rule. At times, it does not seem I am its
king at all. It seems to triumph over me and tell me what to think and
what to do and feel. And yet it has been given me to serve whatever
purpose I perceive in it. My mind can only serve. Today I give its
service to the Holy Spirit to employ as He sees fit. I thus direct my
mind, which I alone can rule. And thus I set it free to do the Will of
God.

*^2^ Father, my mind is open to Your Thoughts and closed today to every
thought but Yours. I rule my mind and offer it to You. Accept my gift,
for it is Yours to me.*
:::

[]{#part0048_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 237 Now would I be as God created me**](#part0004.html#level-507) {#part0048_split_007.html#h1-507 .level1}

^1^ Today I will accept the truth about myself. I will arise in glory
and allow the light in me to shine upon the world throughout the day. I
bring the world the tidings of salvation that I hear as God my Father
speaks to me. And I behold the world that Christ would have me see,
aware it ends the bitter dream of death, aware it is my Father's call to
me.

*^2^ Christ is my eyes today, and His the ears which listen to the Voice
of God today. Father, I come to You through Him Who is Your Son and my
true Self as well. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0048_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 238 On my decision all salvation rests**](#part0004.html#level-508) {#part0048_split_008.html#h1-508 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Your trust in me has been so great I must be worthy. You
created me and know me as I am. And yet You placed Your Son's salvation
in my hands and let it rest on my decision. I must be beloved of You
indeed. And I must be steadfast in holiness as well, that You would give
Your Son to me in certainty that He is safe Who still is part of You and
yet is mine because He is my Self.*

^2^ And so again today we pause to think how much our Father loves us.
And how dear His Son, created by His Love, remains to Him Whose Love is
made complete in him.
:::

[]{#part0048_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 239 The glory of my Father is my own**](#part0004.html#level-509) {#part0048_split_009.html#h1-509 .level1}

^1^ Let not the truth about ourselves today be hidden by a false
humility. Let us instead be thankful for the gifts our Father gave us.
Can we see in those with whom He shares His glory any trace of sin and
guilt? And can it be that we are not among them when He loves His Son
forever and with perfect constancy, knowing he is as He created him?

*^2^ We thank You, Father, for the light that shines forever in us. And
we honor it because You share it with us. We are one, united in this
light, and one with You, at peace with all creation and ourselves.*
:::

[]{#part0048_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 240 Fear is not justified in any form**](#part0004.html#level-510) {#part0048_split_010.html#h1-510 .level1}

^1^ Fear is deception. It attests that you have seen yourself as you
could never be and therefore look upon a world which is impossible. Not
one thing in this world is true. It does not matter what the form in
which it may appear. It witnesses but to your own illusions of yourself.
Let us not be deceived today. We are the Son of God. There is no fear in
us, for we are each a part of Love Itself.

*^2^ How foolish are our fears! Would You allow Your Son to suffer? Give
us faith today to recognize Your Son and set him free. Let us forgive
him in Your Name, that we may understand his holiness and feel the love
for him that is Your own as well.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**3. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} W[ORLD]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-34) {#part0049_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST241:1^The world is false perception. It is born of error, and it has
not left its source. It will remain no longer than the thought which
gave it birth is cherished. When the thought of separation has been
changed to one of true forgiveness will the world be seen in quite
another light, and one which leads to truth, where all the world must
disappear and all its errors vanish. Now its source has gone, and its
effects are gone as well.

^2^ The world was made as an attack on God. It symbolizes fear. And what
is fear except love's absence? Thus the world was meant to be a place
where God could enter not and where His Son could be apart from Him.
Here was perception born, for knowledge could not cause such insane
thoughts. But eyes deceive, and ears hear falsely. Now mistakes become
quite possible, for certainty has gone.

^3^ The mechanisms of illusion have been born instead. And now they go
to find what has been given them to seek. Their aim is to fulfil the
purpose which the world was made to witness and make real. They see in
its illusions but a solid base where truth exists, upheld apart from
lies. Yet everything that they report is but illusion, which is kept
apart from truth.

^4^ As sight was made to lead away from truth, it can be redirected.
Sounds become the call of God. And all perception can be given a new
purpose by the one Whom God appointed savior to the world. Follow His
light and see the world as He beholds it. Hear His Voice alone in all
that speaks to you. And let Him give you peace and certainty, which you
have thrown away but Heaven has preserved for you in Him.

^5^ Let us not rest content until the world has joined our changed
perception. Let us not be satisfied until forgiveness has been made
complete. And let us not attempt to change our function. We must save
the world. For we who made it must behold it through the eyes of Christ,
that what was made to die be restored to Everlasting Life.
:::

[]{#part0049_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 241 This holy instant is salvation come**](#part0004.html#level-511) {#part0049_split_001.html#h1-511 .level1}

^1^ What joy there is today! It is a time of special celebration. For
today holds out the instant to the darkened world where its release is
set. The day has come when sorrows pass away and pain is gone. The glory
of salvation dawns today upon a world set free. This is the time of hope
for countless millions. They will be united now as you forgive them all.
For I will be forgiven by you today.

*^2^ We have forgiven one another now, and so we come at last to You
again. Father, Your Son, who never left, returns to Heaven and his home.
How glad are we to have our sanity restored to us, and to remember that
we all are one.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 242 This day is God's. It is my gift to Him**](#part0004.html#level-512) {#part0049_split_002.html#h1-512 .level1}

^1^ I will not lead my life alone today. I do not understand the world.
And so to try to lead my life alone must be but foolishness. For there
is One Who knows all that is best for me. And He is glad to make no
choices for me but the ones that lead to God. This day I give to Him,
for I would not delay my coming home, and it is He Who knows the way to
Him.

*^2^ And so we give today to You. We come with wholly open minds. We do
not ask for anything that we may think we want. Give us what You would
have received by us. You know all our desires and our needs. And You
will give us everything we want and that will help us find the way to
You.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 243 Today I will judge nothing that occurs**](#part0004.html#level-513) {#part0049_split_003.html#h1-513 .level1}

^1^ I will be honest with myself today. I will not think that I already
know what must remain beyond my present grasp. I will not think I
understand the whole from bits of my perception, which are all that I
can see. Today I recognize that this is so. And so I am relieved of
judgment which I cannot make. Thus do I free myself and what I look
upon, to be in peace as God created us.

*^2^ Father, today I leave creation free to be itself. I honor all its
parts, in which I am included. We are one because each part contains
Your memory, and truth must shine in all of us as one.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 244 I am in danger nowhere in the world**](#part0004.html#level-514) {#part0049_split_004.html#h1-514 .level1}

*^1^ Your Son is safe wherever he may be, for You are there with him. He
need but call upon Your Name, and he will recollect his safety and Your
Love, for they are one. How can he fear or doubt or fail to know he
cannot suffer, be endangered, or experience unhappiness when he belongs
to You, beloved and loving, in the safety of Your Fatherly embrace?*

^2^ And there we are in truth. No storms can come into the hallowed
haven of our home. In God are we secure. For what can come to threaten
God Himself or make afraid what will forever be a part of Him?
:::

[]{#part0049_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 245 Your peace is with me, Father. I am safe**](#part0004.html#level-515) {#part0049_split_005.html#h1-515 .level1}

*^1^ Your peace surrounds me, Father. Where I go, Your peace goes there
with me. It sheds its light on everyone I meet. I bring it to the
desolate and lonely and afraid. I give Your peace to those who suffer
pain or grieve for loss or think they are bereft of hope and happiness.
Send them to me, my Father. Let me bring Your peace with me. For I would
save Your Son as is Your Will that I may come to recognize my Self.*

^2^ And so we go in peace. To all the world we give the message that we
have received. And thus we come to hear the Voice of God, Who speaks to
us as we relate His Word, Whose Love we recognize because we share the
Word that He has given unto us.
:::

[]{#part0049_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 246 To love my Father is to love His Son**](#part0004.html#level-516) {#part0049_split_006.html#h1-516 .level1}

^1^ Let me not think that I can find the way to God if I have hatred in
my heart. Let me not try to hurt God's Son and think that I can know his
Father or my Self. Let me not fail to recognize myself and still believe
that my awareness can contain my Father, or my mind conceive of all the
love my Father has for me and all the love which I return to Him.

*^2^ I will accept the way You choose for me to come to You, my Father.
For in that will I succeed because it is Your Will. And I would
recognize that what You will is what I will as well and only that. And
so I choose to love Your Son. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 247 Without forgiveness I will still be blind**](#part0004.html#level-517) {#part0049_split_007.html#h1-517 .level1}

^1^ Sin is the symbol of attack. Behold it anywhere, and I will suffer.
For forgiveness is the only means whereby Christ's vision comes to me.
Let me accept what His sight shows me as the simple truth and I am
healed completely. Brother, come and let me look on you. Your loveliness
reflects my own. Your sinlessness is mine. You stand forgiven, and I
stand with you.

*^2^ So would I look on everyone today. My brothers are Your Sons. Your
Fatherhood created them and gave them all to me as part of You and my
own Self as well. Today I honor You through them, and thus I hope this
day to recognize my Self.*

::: {#part0049_split_007.html#calibre_pb_8 .calibre7}
:::
:::

[]{#part0049_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 248 Whatever suffers is not part of me**](#part0004.html#level-518) {#part0049_split_008.html#h1-518 .level1}

^1^ I have disowned the truth. Now let me be as faithful in disowning
falsity. Whatever suffers is not part of me. What grieves is not myself.
What is in pain is but illusion in my mind. What dies was never living
in reality and did but mock the truth about myself. Now I disown
self-concepts and deceits and lies about the holy Son of God. Now am I
ready to accept him back as God created him and as he is.

*^2^ Father, my ancient love for You returns and lets me love Your Son
again as well. Father, I am as You created me. Now is Your Love
remembered and my own. Now do I understand that they are one.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 249 Forgiveness ends all suffering and loss**](#part0004.html#level-519) {#part0049_split_009.html#h1-519 .level1}

^1^ Forgiveness paints a picture of a world where suffering is over,
loss becomes impossible, and anger makes no sense. Attack is gone, and
madness has an end. What suffering is now conceivable? What loss can be
sustained? The world becomes a place of joy, abundance, charity, and
endless giving. It is now so like to Heaven that it quickly is
transformed into the Light that it reflects. And so the journey which
the Son of God began has ended in the Light from Which he came.

*^2^ Father, we would return our minds to You. We have betrayed them,
held them in a vise of bitterness, and frightened them with thoughts of
violence and death. Now would we rest again in You, as You created us.*
:::

[]{#part0049_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 250 Let me not see myself as limited**](#part0004.html#level-520) {#part0049_split_010.html#h1-520 .level1}

^1^ Let me behold the Son of God today and witness to his glory. Let me
not try to obscure the holy light in him and see his strength diminished
and reduced to frailty nor perceive the lacks in him with which I would
attack his sovereignty.

*^2^ He is Your Son, my Father. And today I would behold his gentleness
instead of my illusions. He is what I am, and as I see him, so I see
myself. Today I would see truly that this day I may at last identify
with him.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**4. W[HAT IS]{.small} S[IN]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-35) {#part0050_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST251:1^Sin is insanity. It is the means by which the mind is driven
mad and seeks to let illusions take the place of truth. And being mad,
it sees illusions where truth should be and where it really is. Sin gave
the body eyes, for what is there the sinless would behold? What need
have they of sights or sounds or touch? What would they hear or reach to
grasp? What would they sense at all? To sense is not to know. And truth
can be but filled with knowledge and with nothing else.

^2^ The body is the instrument the mind made in its striving to deceive
itself. Its purpose is to strive. Yet can the goal of striving change.
And now the body serves a different aim for striving. What it seeks for
now is chosen by the aim the mind has taken as replacement for the goal
of self-deception. Truth can be its aim as well as lies. The senses then
will seek instead for witnesses to what is true.

^3^ Sin is the home of all illusions, which but stand for things
imagined, issuing from thoughts which are untrue. They are the "proof"
that what has no reality is real. Sin "proves" God's Son is evil;
timelessness must have an end; eternal life must die. And God Himself
has lost the Son He loves, with but corruption to complete Himself, His
Will forever overcome by death, love slain by hate, and peace to be no
more.

^4^ A madman's dreams are frightening, and sin appears indeed to
terrify. And yet what sin perceives is but a childish game. The Son of
God may play he has become a body, prey to evil and to guilt, with but a
little life that ends in death. But all the while his Father shines on
him and loves him with an everlasting Love which his pretenses cannot
change at all.

^5^ How long, oh Son of God, will you maintain the game of sin? Shall we
not put away these sharp-edged children's toys? How soon will you be
ready to come home? Perhaps today? There is no sin. Creation is
unchanged. Would you still hold return to Heaven back? How long, oh holy
Son of God, how long?
:::

[]{#part0050_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 251 I am in need of nothing but the truth**](#part0004.html#level-521) {#part0050_split_001.html#h1-521 .level1}

^1^ I sought for many things and found despair. Now do I seek but one,
for in that one is all I need and only what I need. All that I sought
before I needed not and did not even want. My only need I did not
recognize. But now I see that I need only truth. In that, all needs are
satisfied, all cravings end, all hopes are finally fulfilled, and dreams
are gone. Now have I everything that I could need. Now have I everything
that I could want. And now at last I find myself at peace.

*^2^ And for that peace, our Father, we give thanks. What we denied
ourselves You have restored, and only that is what we really want.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 252 The Son of God is my Identity**](#part0004.html#level-522) {#part0050_split_002.html#h1-522 .level1}

^1^ My Self is holy beyond all the thoughts of holiness of which I now
conceive. Its shimmering and perfect purity is far more brilliant than
is any light that I have ever looked upon. Its love is limitless, with
an intensity that holds all things within it in the calm of quiet
certainty. Its strength comes not from burning impulses which move the
world but from the boundless Love of God Himself. How far beyond this
world my Self must be, and yet how near to me and close to God!

*^2^ Father, You know my true identity. Reveal it now to me who am Your
Son, that I may waken to the truth in You and know that Heaven is
restored to me.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 253 My Self is ruler of the universe**](#part0004.html#level-523) {#part0050_split_003.html#h1-523 .level1}

^1^ It is impossible that anything should come to me unbidden by myself.
Even in this world, it is I who rule my destiny. What happens is what I
desire. What does not occur is what I do not want to happen. This must I
accept. For thus am I led past this world to my creations, children of
my Will, in Heaven where my holy Self abides with them and Him Who has
created me.

*^2^ You are the Self Whom You created Son, creating like Yourself and
one with You. My Self, Which rules the universe, is but Your Will in
perfect union with my own, which can but offer glad assent to Yours that
It may be extended to itself.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 254 Let every voice but God's be still in me**](#part0004.html#level-524) {#part0050_split_004.html#h1-524 .level1}

1 Father, today I would but hear Your Voice. In deepest silence, I would
come to You to hear Your Voice and to receive Your Word. I have no
prayer but this: I come to You to ask You for the truth. And truth is
but Your Will, which I would share with You today.

^2^ Today we let no evil thoughts direct our words or actions. When such
thoughts occur, we quietly step back and look at them, and then we let
them go. We do not want what they would bring with them. And so we do
not choose to keep them. They are silent now. And in the stillness,
hallowed by His Love, God speaks to us and tells us of our will, as we
have chosen to remember Him.
:::

[]{#part0050_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 255 This day I choose to spend in perfect peace**](#part0004.html#level-525) {#part0050_split_005.html#h1-525 .level1}

^1^ It does not seem to me that I can choose to have but peace today.
And yet my God assures me that His Son is like Himself. Let me this day
have faith in Him Who says I am God's Son. And let the peace I choose be
mine today bear witness to the truth of what He says. God's Son can have
no cares and must remain forever in the peace of Heaven. In his name I
give today to finding what my Father wills for me, accepting it as mine
and giving it to all my Father's Sons, along with me.

*^2^ And so, my Father, would I pass this day with You. Your Son has not
forgotten You. The peace You gave him still is in his mind, and it is
there I choose to spend today.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 256 God is the only goal I have today**](#part0004.html#level-526) {#part0050_split_006.html#h1-526 .level1}

^1^ The way to God is through forgiveness here. There is no other way.
If sin had not been cherished by the mind, what need would there have
been to find a way to where you are? Who would still be uncertain? Who
could be unsure of who he is? And who would yet remain asleep in heavy
clouds of doubt about the holiness of him who God created sinless? Here
we can but dream. But we can dream we have forgiven him in whom all sin
remains impossible, and it is this we choose to dream today. God is our
goal; forgiveness is the means by which our minds return to Him at last.

*^2^ And so, our Father, would we come to You in Your appointed way. We
have no goal except to hear Your Voice and find the way Your sacred Word
has pointed out to us.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 257 Let me remember what my purpose is**](#part0004.html#level-527) {#part0050_split_007.html#h1-527 .level1}

^1^ If I forget my goal, I can be but confused, unsure of what I am and
thus conflicted in my actions. No one can serve contradicting goals and
serve them well. Nor can he function without deep distress and great
depression. Let us therefore be determined to remember what we want
today that we may unify our thoughts and actions meaningfully and
achieve only what God would have us do today.

*^2^ Father, forgiveness is Your chosen means for our salvation. Let us
not forget that we can have no will but Yours today. And thus our
purpose must be Yours as well if we would reach the peace You will for
us.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 258 Let me remember that my goal is God**](#part0004.html#level-528) {#part0050_split_008.html#h1-528 .level1}

^1^ All that is needful is to train our minds to overlook all little,
senseless aims and to remember that our goal is God. His memory is
hidden in our minds, obscured but by our pointless little goals which
offer nothing and do not exist. Shall we continue to allow God's grace
to shine in unawareness while the toys and trinkets of the world are
sought instead? God is our only goal, our only Love. We have no aim but
to remember Him.

*^2^ Our goal is but to follow in the way that leads to You. We have no
goal but this. What could we want but to remember You? What could we
seek but our identity?*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 259 Let me remember that there is no sin**](#part0004.html#level-529) {#part0050_split_009.html#h1-529 .level1}

^1^ Sin is the only thought that makes the goal of God seem
unobtainable. What else could blind us to the obvious and make the
strange and the distorted seem more clear? What else but sin engenders
our attacks? What else but sin could be the source of guilt, demanding
punishment and suffering? And what but this could be the source of fear,
obscuring God's creation, giving love the attributes of fear and of
attack?

*^2^ Father, I would not be insane today. I would not be afraid of love
nor seek for refuge in its opposite. For love can have no opposite. You
are the Source of everything that is. And everything that is remains
with You and You with it.*
:::

[]{#part0050_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 260 Let me remember God created me**](#part0004.html#level-530) {#part0050_split_010.html#h1-530 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I did not make myself, although in my insanity I thought I
did. Yet as Your Thought, I have not left my Source, remaining part of
What created me. Your Son, my Father, calls on You today. Let me
remember You created me. Let me remember my Identity. And let my
sinlessness arise again before Christ's vision, through which I would
look upon my brothers and myself today.*

^2^ Now is our Source remembered, and therein we find our true Identity
at last. Holy indeed are we because our Source can know no sin. And we
who are His Sons are like each other and alike to Him.
:::

[]{#part0051_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**5. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} B[ODY]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-36) {#part0051_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

ST261:1 The body is a fence the Son of God imagines he has built to
separate parts of his Self from other parts. It is within this fence, he
thinks he lives, to die as it decays and crumbles. For within this fence
he thinks that he is safe from love. Identifying with his safety, he
regards himself as what his safety is. How else could he be certain he
remains within the body, keeping love outside?

2 The body will not stay. Yet this he sees as double safety. For the Son
of God's impermanence is "proof" his fences work and do the task his
mind assigns to them. For if his oneness still remained untouched, who
could attack and who could be attacked? Who could be victor? Who could
be his prey? Who could be victim? Who the murderer? And if he did not
die, what "proof" is there that God's eternal Son can be destroyed?

3 The body is a dream. Like other dreams, it sometimes seems to picture
happiness but can quite suddenly revert to fear, where every dream is
born. For only love creates in truth, and truth can never fear. Made to
be fearful, must the body serve the purpose given it. But we can change
the purpose which the body will obey by changing what we think that it
is for.

4 The body is the means by which God's Son returns to sanity. Though it
was made to fence him into hell without escape, yet has the goal of
Heaven been exchanged for the pursuit of hell. The Son of God extends
his hand to reach his brother and to help him walk along the road with
him. Now is the body holy. Now it serves to heal the mind that it was
made to kill.

5 You will identify with what you think will make you safe. Whatever it
may be, you will believe that it is one with you. Your safety lies in
truth and not in lies. Love is your safety. Fear does not exist.
Identify with love, and you are safe. Identify with love, and you are
home. Identify with love, and find your Self.
:::

[]{#part0051_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 261 God is my refuge and security**](#part0004.html#level-531) {#part0051_split_001.html#h1-531 .level1}

^1^ I will identify with what I think is refuge and security. I will
behold myself where I perceive my strength and think I live within the
citadel where I am safe and cannot be attacked. Let me today seek not
security in danger, nor attempt to find my peace in murderous attack. I
live in God. In Him I find my refuge and my strength. In Him is my
Identity. In Him is everlasting peace. And only there will I remember
who I really am.

*^2^ Let me not seek for idols. I would come, my Father, home to You
today. I choose to be as You created me and find the Son whom You
created as my Self.*
:::

[]{#part0051_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 262 Let me perceive no differences today**](#part0004.html#level-532) {#part0051_split_002.html#h1-532 .level1}

*^1^ Father, You have one Son. And it is he that I would look upon
today. He is Your one creation. Why should I perceive a thousand forms
in what remains as one? Why should I give this one a thousand names,
when only one suffices? For Your Son must bear Your Name, for You
created him. Let me not see him as a stranger to his Father, nor as
stranger to myself. For he is part of me and I of him, and we are part
of You Who are our Source, eternally united in Your Love, eternally the
holy Son of God.*

^2^ We who are one would recognize this day the truth about ourselves.
We would come home and rest in unity. For there is peace, and nowhere
else can peace be sought and found.
:::

[]{#part0051_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 263 My holy vision sees all things as pure**](#part0004.html#level-533) {#part0051_split_003.html#h1-533 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Your Mind created all that is; Your Spirit entered into it;
Your Love gave life to it. And would I look upon what You created as if
it could be made sinful? I would not perceive such dark and fearful
images. A madman's dream is hardly fit to be my choice instead of all
the loveliness with which You blessed creation-all its purity, its joy,
and its eternal, quiet home in You.*

^2^ And while we still remain outside the gate of Heaven, let us look on
all we see through holy vision and the eyes of Christ. Let all
appearances seem pure to us that we may pass them by in innocence and
walk together to our Father's house as brothers and the holy Sons of
God.
:::

[]{#part0051_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 264 I am surrounded by the Love of God**](#part0004.html#level-534) {#part0051_split_004.html#h1-534 .level1}

*^1^ Father, You stand before me and behind, beside me, in the place I
see myself, and everywhere I go. You are in all the things I look upon,
the sounds I hear, and every hand that reaches for my own. In You time
disappears, and place becomes a meaningless belief. For what surrounds
Your Son and keeps him safe is Love Itself. There is no Source but This,
and nothing is that does not share Its holiness, that stands beyond Your
one creation or without the Love Which holds all things within Itself.
Father, Your Son is like Yourself. We come to You in Your own Name
today, to be at peace within Your everlasting Love.*

^2^ My brothers, join with me in this today. This is salvation's prayer.
Must we not join in what will save the world along with us?
:::

[]{#part0051_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 265 Creation's gentleness is all I see**](#part0004.html#level-535) {#part0051_split_005.html#h1-535 .level1}

^1^ I have indeed misunderstood the world because I laid my "sins" on it
and saw them looking back at me. How fierce they seemed! And how
deceived was I to think that what I feared was in the world instead of
in my mind alone. Today I see the world in the celestial gentleness with
which creation shines. There is no fear in it. Let no appearance of my
"sins" obscure the light of Heaven, shining on the world. What is
reflected here is in God's Mind. The images I see reflect my thoughts.
Yet is my mind at one with God's. And so I can perceive creation's
gentleness.

*^2^ In quiet would I look upon the world, which but reflects Your
Thoughts and mine as well. Let me remember that they are the same, and I
will see creation's gentleness.*
:::

[]{#part0051_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 266 My holy Self abides in you, God's Son**](#part0004.html#level-536) {#part0051_split_006.html#h1-536 .level1}

*^1^ Father, You gave me all Your Sons to be my saviors and my
counselors in sight; the bearers of Your holy Voice to me. In them are
You reflected, and in them does Christ look back upon me from my Self.
Let not Your Son forget Your holy Name. Let not Your Son forget his holy
Source. Let not Your Son forget his name is Yours.*

^2^ This day we enter into paradise, calling upon God's Name and on our
own, acknowledging our Self in each of us, united in the holy Love of
God. How many saviors God has given us! How can we lose the way to Him,
when He has filled the world with those who point to Him and given us
the sight to look on them?
:::

[]{#part0051_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 267 My heart is beating in the peace of God**](#part0004.html#level-537) {#part0051_split_007.html#h1-537 .level1}

^1^ Surrounding me is all the life that God created in His Love. It
calls to me in every heartbeat and in every breath, in every action and
in every thought. Peace fills my heart and floods my body with the
purpose of forgiveness. Now my mind is healed, and all I need to save
the world is given me. Each heartbeat brings me peace; each breath
infuses me with strength. I am a messenger of God, directed by His
Voice, sustained by Him in love, and held forever quiet and at peace
within His loving arms. Each heartbeat calls His Name, and every one is
answered by His Voice, assuring me I am at home in Him.

*^2^ Let me attend Your Answer, not my own. Father, my heart is beating
in the peace the Heart of Love created. It is there and only there that
I can be at home.*
:::

[]{#part0051_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 268 Let all things be exactly as they are**](#part0004.html#level-538) {#part0051_split_008.html#h1-538 .level1}

*^1^ Let me not be Your critic, Lord, today, and judge against You. Let
me not attempt to interfere with Your creation and distort it into
sickly forms. Let me be willing to withdraw my wishes from its unity and
thus to let it be as You created it. For thus will I be able, too, to
recognize my Self as You created me. In Love was I created, and in Love
will I remain forever. What can frighten me when I let all things be
exactly as they are?*
:::

[]{#part0051_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 269 My sight goes forth to look upon Christ's face**](#part0004.html#level-539) {#part0051_split_009.html#h1-539 .level1}

*^1^ I ask Your blessing on my sight today. It is the means which You
have chosen to become the way to show me my mistakes and look beyond
them. It is given me to find a new perception through the Guide You gave
to me and through His lessons to surpass perception and return to truth.
I ask for the illusion which transcends all those I made. Today I choose
to see a world forgiven in which everyone shows me the face of Christ
and teaches me that what I look upon belongs to me, that nothing is
except Your holy Son.*

^2^ Today our sight is blessed indeed. We share one vision as we look
upon the face of Him Whose Self is ours. We are one because of Him Who
is the Son of God, of Him Who is our own Identity.^2^ Let not our sight
be blasphemous today nor let our ears attend to lying tongues. Only
reality is free of pain. Only reality is free of loss. Only reality is
wholly safe. And it is only this we seek today.
:::

[]{#part0051_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 270 I will not use the body's eyes today**](#part0004.html#level-540) {#part0051_split_010.html#h1-540 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Christ's vision is Your gift to me, and it has power to
translate all that the body's eyes behold into the sight of a forgiven
world. How glorious and gracious is this world! Yet how much more will I
perceive in it than sight can give. The world forgiven signifies Your
Son acknowledges his Father, lets his dreams be brought to truth, and
waits expectantly the one remaining instant more of time, which ends
forever as Your memory returns to him. And now his will is one with
Yours. His function now is but Your own, and every thought except Your
own is gone.*

^2^ The quiet of today will bless our hearts, and through them peace
will come to everyone. Christ is our eyes today. And through His sight,
we offer healing to the world through Him, the holy Son whom God created
whole, the holy Son whom God created one.
:::

[]{#part0052_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**6. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} C[HRIST]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-37) {#part0052_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST271:1^ Christ is God's Son as He created Him. He is the Self we
share, uniting us with one another and with God as well. He is the
Thought Which still abides within the Mind That is His Source. He has
not left His holy home nor lost the innocence in which He was created.
He abides unchanged forever in the Mind of God.

^2^ Christ is the link that keeps you one with God and guarantees that
separation is no more than an illusion of despair. For hope forever will
abide in Him. Your mind is part of His and His of yours. He is the part
in which God's Answer lies, where all decisions are already made and
dreams are over. He remains untouched by anything the body's eyes
perceive. For though in Him His Father placed the means for your
salvation, yet does He remain the Self Who, like His Father, knows no
sin.

^3^ Home of the Holy Spirit and at home in God alone, does Christ remain
at peace within the Heaven of your holy mind. This is the only part of
you that has reality in truth. The rest is dreams. Yet will these dreams
be given unto Christ to fade before His glory and reveal your holy Self,
the Christ, to you at last.

^4^ The Holy Spirit reaches from the Christ in you to all your dreams
and bids them come to Him to be translated into truth. He will exchange
them for the final dream which God appointed as the end of dreams. For
when forgiveness rests upon the world and peace has come to every Son of
God, what could remain to keep things separate, for what remains to see
except Christ's face?

^5^ And how long will this holy face be seen, when it is but the symbol
that the time for learning now is over and the goal of the Atonement has
been reached at last? So therefore let us seek to find Christ's face and
look on nothing else. As we behold His glory will we know we have no
need of learning or perception or of time, or anything except the holy
Self, the Christ Whom God created as His Son.
:::

[]{#part0052_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 271 Christ's is the vision I will use today**](#part0004.html#level-541) {#part0052_split_001.html#h1-541 .level1}

^1^ Each day, each hour, every instant, I am choosing what I want to
look upon, the sounds I want to hear, the witnesses to what I want to be
the truth for me. Today I choose to look upon what Christ would have me
see, to listen to God's Voice, and seek the witnesses to what is true in
God's creation. In Christ's sight, the world and God's creation meet,
and as they come together, all perception disappears. His kindly sight
redeems the world from death. For nothing that He looks on but must
live, remembering the Father and the Son; Creator and Creation unified.

*^2^ Father, Christ's vision is the way to You. What He beholds invites
Your memory to be restored to me. And this I choose to be what I would
look upon today.*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 272 How can illusions satisfy God's Son?**](#part0004.html#level-542) {#part0052_split_002.html#h1-542 .level1}

*Father, the truth belongs to me. My home is set in Heaven by Your Will
and mine. Can dreams content me? Can illusions bring me happiness? What
but Your memory can satisfy Your Son? I will accept no less than You
have given me. I am surrounded by Your Love, forever still, forever
gentle, and forever safe. God's Son must be as You created him.*

^2^ Today we pass illusions by. And if we hear temptation call to us to
stay and linger in a dream, we turn aside and ask ourselves if we, the
Sons of God, could be content with dreams when Heaven can be chosen just
as easily as hell and love will happily replace all fear.
:::

[]{#part0052_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 273 The stillness of the peace of God is mine**](#part0004.html#level-543) {#part0052_split_003.html#h1-543 .level1}

^1^ Perhaps we are now ready for a day of undisturbed tranquillity. If
this is not yet feasible, we are content and even more than satisfied to
learn how such a day can be achieved. If we give way to a disturbance,
let us learn how to dismiss it and return to peace. We need but tell our
minds with certainty, "The stillness of the peace of God is mine," and
nothing can intrude upon the peace that God Himself has given to His
Son.

*^2^ Father, Your peace is mine. What need have I to fear that anything
can rob me of what You would have me keep? I cannot lose Your gifts to
me. And so the peace You gave Your Son is with me still, in quietness
and in my own eternal love for You.*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 274 Today belongs to Love. Let me not fear**](#part0004.html#level-544) {#part0052_split_004.html#h1-544 .level1}

*^1^ Father, today I would let all things be as You created them and
give Your Son the honor due his sinlessness, the love of brother to his
brother and his friend. Through this I am redeemed. Through this as well
the truth will enter where illusions were, light will replace all
darkness, and Your Son will know he is as You created him.*

^2^ A special blessing comes to us today from Him Who is our Father.
Give this day to Him and there will be no fear today because the day is
given unto Love.
:::

[]{#part0052_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 275 God's healing Voice protects all things today**](#part0004.html#level-545) {#part0052_split_005.html#h1-545 .level1}

^1^ Let us today attend the Voice of God, Which speaks an ancient
lesson, no more true today than any other day. Yet has this day been
chosen as the time when we will seek and hear and learn and understand.
Join me in hearing. For the Voice of God tells us of things we cannot
understand alone, nor learn apart. It is in this that all things are
protected. And in this the healing of the Voice of God is found.

*^2^ Your healing Voice protects all things today, and so I leave all
things to You. I need be anxious over nothing. For Your Voice will tell
me what to do and where to go, to whom to speak, and what to say to him,
what thoughts to think, what words to give the world. The safety that I
bring is given me. Father, Your Voice protects all things through me.*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 276 The Word of God is given me to speak**](#part0004.html#level-546) {#part0052_split_006.html#h1-546 .level1}

^1^ What is the Word of God? "My Son is pure and holy as Myself." And
thus did God become the Father of the Son He loves, for thus was he
created. This the Word His Son did not create with Him because in this
His Son was born. Let us accept His Fatherhood, and all is given us.
Deny we were created in His Love, and we deny our Self, to be unsure of
who we are, of who our Father is, and for what purpose we have come. And
yet we need but to acknowledge Him Who gave His Word to us in our
creation, to remember Him and so recall our Self.

*^2^ Father, Your Word is mine. And it is this that I would speak to all
my brothers, who are given me to cherish as my own, as I am loved and
blessed and saved by You.*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 277 Let me not bind Your Son with laws I made**](#part0004.html#level-547) {#part0052_split_007.html#h1-547 .level1}

*^1^ Your Son is free, my Father. Let me not imagine I have bound him
with the laws I made to rule the body. He is not subject to any laws I
made by which I try to make the body more secure. He is not changed by
what is changeable. He is not slave to any laws of time. He is as You
created him because he knows no laws except the Law of Love**.***

^2^ Let us not worship idols, nor believe in any laws idolatry would
make to hide the freedom of the Son of God. He is not bound except by
his beliefs. Yet what he is is far beyond his faith in slavery or
freedom. He is free because he is his Father's Son. And he can not be
bound unless God's Truth can lie and God can will that He deceive
Himself.
:::

[]{#part0052_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 278 If I am bound, my Father is not free**](#part0004.html#level-548) {#part0052_split_008.html#h1-548 .level1}

^1^ If I accept that I am prisoner within a body in a world in which all
things that seem to live appear to die, then is my Father prisoner with
me. And this do I believe when I maintain the laws the world obeys must
I obey-the frailties and the sins which I perceive are real and cannot
be escaped. If I am bound in any way, I do not know my Father or my
Self. And I am lost to all reality. For truth is free, and what is bound
is not a part of truth.

*^2^ Father, I ask for nothing but the truth. I have had many foolish
thoughts about myself and my creation and have brought a dream of fear
into my mind. Today I would not dream. I choose the way to You instead
of madness and instead of fear. For truth is safe and only love is
sure.*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 279 Creation's freedom promises my own**](#part0004.html#level-549) {#part0052_split_009.html#h1-549 .level1}

^1^ The end of dreams is promised me because God's Son is not abandoned
by His Love. Only in dreams is there a time when he appears to be in
prison and awaits a future freedom if it be at all. Yet in reality his
dreams are gone, with truth established in their place. And now is
freedom his already. Should I wait in chains which have been severed for
release, when God is offering me freedom now?

*^2^ I will accept Your promises today and give my faith to them. My
Father loves the Son Whom He created as His own. Would You withhold the
gifts You gave to me?*
:::

[]{#part0052_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 280 What limits can I lay upon God's Son?**](#part0004.html#level-550) {#part0052_split_010.html#h1-550 .level1}

^1^ Whom God created limitless is free. I can invent imprisonment for
him, but only in illusions, not in truth. No Thought of God has left its
Father's Mind. No Thought of God is limited at all. No Thought of God
but is forever pure. Can I lay limits on the Son of God, whose Father
willed that he be limitless and like Himself in freedom and in love?

*^2^ Today let me give honor to Your Son, for thus alone I find the way
to You. Father, I lay no limits on the Son You love and You created
limitless. The honor that I give to him is Yours, and what is Yours
belongs to me as well.*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**7. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} H[OLY]{.small} S[PIRIT]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-38) {#part0053_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST281:1^The Holy Spirit mediates between illusions and the truth. As He
must bridge the gap between reality and dreams, perception leads to
knowledge through the grace that God has given Him, to be His gift to
everyone who turns to Him for truth. Across the bridge that He provides
are dreams all carried to the truth, to be dispelled before the light of
knowledge. There are sights and sounds forever laid aside. And where
they were perceived before, forgiveness has made possible perception's
tranquil end.

^2^ The goal the Holy Spirit's teaching sets is just this end of dreams.
For sights and sounds must be translated from the witnesses of fear to
those of love. And when this is entirely accomplished, learning has
achieved the only goal it has in truth. For learning, as the Holy Spirit
guides it to the outcome He perceives for it, becomes the means to go
beyond itself, to be replaced by the Eternal Truth.

^3^ If you but knew how much your Father yearns to have you recognize
your sinlessness, you would not let His Voice appeal in vain nor turn
away from His replacement for the fearful images and dreams you made.
The Holy Spirit understands the means you made, by which you would
attain what is forever unattainable. And if you offer them to Him, He
will employ the means you made for exile to restore your mind to where
it truly is at home.

^4^ From knowledge, where He has been placed by God, the Holy Spirit
calls to you to let forgiveness rest upon your dreams and be restored to
sanity and peace of mind. Without forgiveness will your dreams remain to
terrify you. And the memory of all your Father's Love will not return to
signify the end of dreams has come.

^5^ Accept your Father's gift. It is a call from Love to Love that it be
but itself. The Holy Spirit is His gift by Which the quietness of Heaven
is restored to God's beloved Son. Would you refuse to take the function
of completing God when all He wills is that you be complete?
:::

[]{#part0053_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 281 I can be hurt by nothing but my thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-551) {#part0053_split_001.html#h1-551 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Your Son is perfect. When he thinks that he is hurt in any
way, it is because he has forgotten who he is. And that he is as You
created him. Your Thoughts can only bring me happiness. If ever I am sad
or hurt or ill, I have forgotten what You think and put my little,
meaningless ideas in place of where Your Thoughts belong and where They
are. I can be hurt by nothing but my thoughts. The Thoughts I think with
You can only bless. The Thoughts I think with You alone are true.*

^2^ I will not hurt myself today. For I am far beyond all pain. My
Father placed me safe in Heaven, watching over me. And I would not
attack the Son He loves, for what He loves is mine to love as well.
:::

[]{#part0053_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 282 I will not be afraid of love today**](#part0004.html#level-552) {#part0053_split_002.html#h1-552 .level1}

^1^ If I could realize but this today, salvation would be reached for
all the world. This the decision not to be insane and to accept myself
as God Himself, my Father and my Source, created me. This the
determination not to be asleep in dreams of death while truth remains
forever living in the joy of life. And this the choice to recognize the
Self Whom God created as the Son He loves and Who remains my one
Reality.

*^2^ Father, Your Name is Love, and so is mine. Such is the truth. And
can the truth be changed by merely giving it another name? The name of
fear is simply a mistake. Let me not be afraid of truth today.*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 283 My true identity abides in You**](#part0004.html#level-553) {#part0053_split_003.html#h1-553 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I made an image of myself, and it is this I call the Son of
God. Yet is creation as it always was, for Your creation is
unchangeable. Let me not worship idols. I am he my Father loves. His
holiness remains the light of Heaven and the Love of God. Is not what is
beloved of You secure? Is not the light of Heaven infinite? Is not Your
Son my true Identity, when You created everything that is?*

^2^ Now are we one in shared identity, with God our Father as our only
Source and everything created part of us. And so we offer blessing to
all things, uniting lovingly with all the world, which our forgiveness
has made one with us.
:::

[]{#part0053_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 284 I can elect to change all thoughts that hurt**](#part0004.html#level-554) {#part0053_split_004.html#h1-554 .level1}

^1^ Loss is not loss when properly perceived. Pain is impossible. There
is no grief with any cause at all. And suffering of any kind is nothing
but a dream. Such is the truth-at first to be but said and then repeated
many times and next to be accepted as but partly true with many
reservations. Then to be considered seriously more and more, and finally
accepted as the truth. I can elect to change all thoughts that hurt. And
I would go beyond these words today, go past all reservations, and
arrive at full acceptance of the truth in them.

*^2^ Father, what You have given cannot hurt, and grief and pain must be
impossible. Let me not fail to trust in You today, accepting but the
joyous as Your gifts, accepting but the joyous as the truth.*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 285 My holiness shines bright and clear today**](#part0004.html#level-555) {#part0053_split_005.html#h1-555 .level1}

^1^ Today I wake with joy, expecting but the happy things of God to come
to me. I ask but them to come and realize my invitation will be answered
by the thoughts to which it has been sent by me. And I will ask for only
joyous things the instant I accept my holiness. For what would be the
use of pain to me, what purpose would my suffering fulfill, and how
would grief and loss avail me, if insanity departs from me today and I
accept my holiness instead?

*^2^ Father, my holiness is Yours. Let me rejoice in it and through
forgiveness be restored to sanity. Your Son is still as You created him.
My holiness is part of me and also part of You. And what can alter
Holiness Itself?*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 286 The hush of Heaven holds my heart today**](#part0004.html#level-556) {#part0053_split_006.html#h1-556 .level1}

*^1^ Father, how still today! How quietly do all things fall in place!
This is the day that has been chosen as the time in which I come to
understand the lesson that there is no need that I do anything. In You
is every choice already made. In You has every conflict been resolved.
In You is everything I hope to find already given me. Your peace is
mine. My heart is quiet and my mind at rest. Your Love is Heaven, and
Your Love is mine.*

^2^ The stillness of today will give us hope that we have found the way
and travelled far along it to a wholly certain goal. Today we will not
doubt the end which God Himself has promised us. We trust in Him and in
our Self, Who still is one with Him.
:::

[]{#part0053_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 287 You are my goal, my Father. Only You**](#part0004.html#level-557) {#part0053_split_007.html#h1-557 .level1}

^1^ Where would I go but Heaven? What could be a substitute for
happiness? What gift could I prefer before the peace of God? What
treasure would I seek and find and keep that can compare with my
identity? And would I rather live with fear than love?

*^2^ You are my goal, my Father. What but You could I desire to have?
What way but that which leads to You could I desire to walk? And what
except the memory of You could signify to me the end of dreams and
futile substitutions for the truth? You are my only goal. Your Son would
be as You created him. What way but this could I expect to recognize my
Self and be at one with my Identity?*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 288 Let me forget my brother's past today**](#part0004.html#level-558) {#part0053_split_008.html#h1-558 .level1}

*^1^ This is the thought that leads the way to You and brings me to my
goal. I cannot come to You without my brother. And to know my Source, I
first must recognize what You created one with me. My brother's is the
hand that leads me on the way to You. His sins are in the past along
with mine. And I am saved because the past is gone. Let me not cherish
it within my heart or I will lose the way to walk to You. My brother is
my savior. Let me not attack the savior You have given me. But let me
honor him who bears Your Name and so remember that It is my own.*

^2^ Forgive me, then, today. And you will know you have forgiven me if
you behold your brother in the light of holiness. He cannot be less holy
than can I, and you cannot be holier than he.
:::

[]{#part0053_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 289 The past is over. It can touch me not**](#part0004.html#level-559) {#part0053_split_009.html#h1-559 .level1}

^1^ Unless the past is over in my mind, the real world must escape my
sight. For I am really looking nowhere, seeing but what is not there.
How can I then perceive the world forgiveness offers? This the past was
made to hide, for this the world that can be looked on only now. It has
no past. For what can be forgiven but the past, and if it is forgiven,
it is gone.

*^2^ Father, let me not look upon a past that is not there. For You have
offered me Your own replacement in a present world the past has left
untouched and free of sin. Here is the end of guilt. And here am I made
ready for Your final step. Shall I demand that You wait longer for Your
Son to find the loveliness You planned to be the end of all his dreams
and all his pain?*
:::

[]{#part0053_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 290 My present happiness is all I see**](#part0004.html#level-560) {#part0053_split_010.html#h1-560 .level1}

^1^ Unless I look upon what is not there, my present happiness is all I
see. Eyes that begin to open see at last. And I would have Christ's
vision come to me this very day. What I perceive without God's own
correction for the sight I made is frightening and painful to behold.
Yet I would not allow my mind to be deceived by the belief the dream I
made is real an instant longer. This the day I seek my present happiness
and look on nothing else except the thing I seek.

*^2^ With this resolve, I come to You and ask Your strength to hold me
up today while I but do Your Will. You cannot fail to hear me, Father.
What I ask have You already given me, and I am sure that I will see my
happiness today.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**8. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} R[EAL]{.small} W[ORLD]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-39) {#part0054_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST291:1^ The real world is a symbol like the rest of what perception
offers. Yet it stands for what is opposite to what you made. Your world
is seen through eyes of fear and brings the witnesses of terror to your
mind. The real world cannot be perceived except through eyes forgiveness
blesses, so they see a world where terror is impossible and witnesses to
fear can not be found.

^2^ The real world holds a counterpart for each unhappy thought
reflected in your world, a sure correction for the sights of fear and
sounds of battle which your world contains. The real world shows a world
seen differently, through quiet eyes and with a mind at peace. Nothing
but rest is there. There are no cries of pain and sorrow heard, for
nothing here remains outside forgiveness. And the sights are gentle.
Only happy sights and sounds can reach the mind that has forgiven
itself.

^3^ What need has such a mind for thoughts of death, attack, and murder?
What can it perceive surrounding it but safety, love, and joy? What is
there it would choose to be condemned, and what is there that it would
judge against? The world it sees arises from a mind at peace within
itself. No danger lurks in anything it sees, for it is kind and only
kindness does it look upon.

^4^ The real world is the symbol that the dream of sin and guilt is over
and God's Son no longer sleeps. His waking eyes perceive the sure
reflection of his Father's Love, the certain promise that he is
redeemed. The real world signifies the end of time, for its perception
makes time purposeless.

^5^ The Holy Spirit has no need of time when it has served His purpose.
Now He waits but that one instant more for God to take His final step,
and time has disappeared, taking perception with it as it goes and
leaving but the Truth to be Itself. That instant is our goal, for it
contains the memory of God. And as we look upon a world forgiven, it is
He Who calls to us and comes to take us home, reminding us of our
Identity which our forgiveness has restored to us.
:::

[]{#part0054_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 291 This is a day of stillness and of peace**](#part0004.html#level-561) {#part0054_split_001.html#h1-561 .level1}

^1^ Christ's vision looks through me today. His sight shows me all
things forgiven and at peace and offers this same vision to the world.
And I accept this vision in its name, both for myself and for the world
as well. What loveliness we look upon today! What holiness we see
surrounding us! And it is given us to recognize it is a holiness in
which we share; it is the Holiness of God Himself.

*^2^ This day my mind is quiet to receive the Thoughts You offer me. And
I accept what comes from You instead of from myself. I do not know the
way to You. But You are wholly certain. Father, lead Your Son along the
quiet path that ends in You. Let my forgiveness be complete, and let the
memory of You return to me.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 292 A happy outcome to all things is sure**](#part0004.html#level-562) {#part0054_split_002.html#h1-562 .level1}

^1^ God's promises make no exceptions. And He guarantees that only joy
can be the final outcome found for everything. Yet it is up to us when
this is reached-how long we let an alien will appear to be opposing His.
And while we think this will is real, we will not find the end He has
appointed as the outcome of all problems we perceive, all trials we see,
and every situation that we meet. Yet is the ending certain. For God's
Will is done in earth and Heaven. We will seek and we will find
according to His Will, which guarantees that our will is done.

*^2^ We thank You, Father, for Your guarantee of only happy outcomes in
the end. Help us not interfere and so delay the happy endings You have
promised us for every problem that we can perceive, for every trial we
think we still must meet.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 293 All fear is past, and only love is here**](#part0004.html#level-563) {#part0054_split_003.html#h1-563 .level1}

^1^ All fear is past because its source is gone and all its thoughts
gone with it. Love remains the only present state, whose Source is here
forever and forever. Can the world seem bright and clear and safe and
welcoming with all my past mistakes oppressing it and showing me
distorted forms of pain? Yet in the present, love is obvious and its
effects apparent. All the world shines in reflection of its holy light,
and I perceive a world forgiven at last.

*^2^ Father, let not Your holy world escape my sight today. Nor let my
ears be deaf to all the hymns of gratitude the world is singing
underneath the sounds of fear. There is a real world which the present
holds safe from all past mistakes. And I would see only this world
before my eyes today.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 294 My body is a wholly neutral thing**](#part0004.html#level-564) {#part0054_split_004.html#h1-564 .level1}

^1^ I am a Son of God. And can I be another thing as well? Did God
create the mortal and corruptible? What use has God's beloved Son for
what must die? And yet a neutral thing does not see death, for thoughts
of fear are not invested there, nor is a mockery of love bestowed upon
it. Its neutrality protects it while it has a use. And afterwards,
without a purpose, it is laid aside. It is not sick or old or hurt. It
is but functionless, unneeded and cast off. Let me not see it more than
this today-of service for a while and fit to serve, to keep its
usefulness while it can serve, and then to be replaced for greater good.

*^2^ My body, Father, cannot be Your Son. And what is not created cannot
be sinful or sinless, neither good nor bad. Let me, then, use this dream
to help Your plan that we awaken from all dreams we made.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 295 The Holy Spirit looks through me today**](#part0004.html#level-565) {#part0054_split_005.html#h1-565 .level1}

^1^ Christ asks that He may use my eyes today and thus redeem the world.
He asks this gift that He may offer peace of mind to me and take away
all terror and all pain. And as they are removed from me, the dreams
that seemed to settle on the world are gone. Redemption must be one. As
I am saved, the world is saved with me. For all of us must be redeemed
together. Fear appears in many different forms, but love is one.

*^2^ My Father, Christ has asked a gift of me, and one I give that it be
given me. Help me to use the eyes of Christ today and thus allow the
Holy Spirit's Love to bless all things that I may look upon, that His
forgiving Love may rest on me.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 296 The Holy Spirit speaks through me today**](#part0004.html#level-566) {#part0054_split_006.html#h1-566 .level1}

*^1^ The Holy Spirit needs my voice today, that all the world may listen
to Your Voice and hear Your Word through me. I am resolved to let You
speak through me, for I would use no words but Yours and have no
thoughts which are apart from Yours, for only Yours are true. I would be
savior to the world I made. For having damned it, I would set it free
that I may find escape and hear the Word Your holy Voice will speak to
me today.*

^2^ We teach today what we would learn and that alone. And so our
learning goal becomes an unconflicted one and possible of easy reach and
quick accomplishment. How gladly does the Holy Spirit come to rescue us
from hell when we allow His teaching to persuade the world through us to
seek and find the easy path to God!
:::

[]{#part0054_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 297 Forgiveness is the only gift I give**](#part0004.html#level-567) {#part0054_split_007.html#h1-567 .level1}

^1^ Forgiveness is the only gift I give because it is the only gift I
want, and everything I give I give myself. This is salvation's simple
formula. And I, who would be saved, would make it mine to be the way I
live within a world that needs salvation and that will be saved as I
accept Atonement for myself.

*^2^ Father, how certain are Your ways, how sure their outcome, and how
truly faithful is every step in my salvation set already and
accomplished by Your grace. Thanks be to You for Your eternal gifts, and
thanks to You for my identity.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 298 I love You, Father, and I love Your Son**](#part0004.html#level-568) {#part0054_split_008.html#h1-568 .level1}

^1^ My gratitude permits my love to be accepted without fear. And thus
am I restored to my Reality at last. All that intruded on my holy sight
forgiveness takes away. And I draw near the end of senseless journeys,
mad careers, and artificial values. I accept instead what God
establishes as mine, sure that in that alone I will be saved, sure that
I go through fear to meet my Love.

*^2^ Father, I come to You today, because I would not follow any way but
Yours. You are beside me. Certain is Your way. And I am grateful for
Your holy gifts of certain sanctuary and escape from everything that
would obscure my love for God, my Father, and His holy Son.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 299 Eternal holiness abides in me**](#part0004.html#level-569) {#part0054_split_009.html#h1-569 .level1}

^1^ My holiness is far beyond my own ability to understand or know. Yet
God my Father, Who created it, acknowledges my holiness as His. Our Will
together understands it. And our Will together knows that it is so.

*^2^ Father, my holiness is not of me. It is not mine to be destroyed by
sin. It is not mine to suffer from attack. Illusions can obscure it but
cannot put out its radiance nor dim its light. It stands forever perfect
and untouched. In it are all things healed, for they remain as You
created them. And I can know my holiness. For Holiness Itself created
me, and I can know my Source because it is Your Will that You be known.*
:::

[]{#part0054_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 300 Only an instant does this world endure**](#part0004.html#level-570) {#part0054_split_010.html#h1-570 .level1}

^1^ This is the thought that can be used to say that death and sorrow
are the certain lot of all who come here. For their joys are gone before
they are possessed, or even grasped. Yet this is also the idea that lets
no false perception keep us in its hold nor represent more than a
passing cloud upon a sky eternally serene. And it is this serenity we
seek, unclouded, obvious, and sure today.

*^2^ We seek Your holy world today. For we, Your loving Sons, have lost
our way a while. But we have listened to Your Voice and learned exactly
what to do to be restored to Heaven and our true identity. And we give
thanks today the world endures but for an instant. We would go beyond
that tiny instant to eternity.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**9. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} S[ECOND]{.small} C[OMING]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-40) {#part0055_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST301:1^ Christ's Second Coming, which is sure as God, is merely the
correction of mistakes and the return of sanity. It is a part of the
condition which restores the never lost and re-establishes what is
forever and forever true. It is the invitation to God's Word to take
illusion's place, the willingness to let forgiveness rest upon all
things without exception and without reserve.

^2^ It is the all-inclusive nature of Christ's Second Coming that
permits it to embrace the world and hold you safe within its gentle
advent, which encompasses all living things with you. There is no end to
the release the Second Coming brings, as God's creation must be
limitless. Forgiveness lights the Second Coming's way because it shines
on everyone as one.

^3^ The Second Coming ends the lessons which the Holy Spirit teaches,
making way for the Last Judgment, in which learning ends in one last
summary that will extend beyond itself and reaches up to God. The Second
Coming is the time in which all minds are given to the hands of Christ,
to be returned to Spirit in the name of true creation and the Will of
God.

^4^ The Second Coming is the one event in time which time itself cannot
affect. For everyone who ever came to die or yet will come or who is
present now is equally released from what he made. In this equality is
Christ restored as one identity, in which all Sons of God acknowledge
that they all are one. And God the Father smiles upon His Son, His one
creation and His only joy.

^5^ Pray that this Second Coming will be soon, but do not rest with
that. It needs your eyes and ears and hands and feet. It needs your
voice. And most of all it needs your willingness. Let us rejoice that we
can do God's Will and join together in its holy light. Behold, the Son
of God is one in us, and we can reach our Father's Love through him.
:::

[]{#part0055_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 301 And God Himself shall wipe away all tears**](#part0004.html#level-571) {#part0055_split_001.html#h1-571 .level1}

*^1^ Father, unless I judge I cannot weep. Nor can I suffer pain or feel
I am abandoned and unneeded in the world. This is my home because I
judge it not. And therefore is it only what You will. Let me today
behold it uncondemned through happy eyes forgiveness has released from
all distortion. Let me see Your world instead of mine. And all the tears
I shed will be forgotten, for their source is gone. Father, I will not
judge Your world today.*

^2^ God's world is happy. Those who look on it can only add their joy to
it and bless it as a cause of further joy in them. We wept because we
did not understand. But we have learned the world we saw was false, and
we will look upon God's world today.
:::

[]{#part0055_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 302 Where darkness was, I look upon the light**](#part0004.html#level-572) {#part0055_split_002.html#h1-572 .level1}

*^1^ Father, our eyes are opening at last. Your holy world awaits us, as
our sight is finally restored and we can see. We thought we suffered.
But we had forgot the Son whom You created. Now we see that darkness is
our own imagining and light is there for us to look upon. Christ's
vision changes darkness into light, for fear must disappear when love
has come. Let me forgive Your holy world today that I may look upon its
holiness and understand it but reflects my own.*

^2^ Our Love awaits us as we go to Him and walks beside us, showing us
the way. He fails in nothing. He the end we seek, and He the means by
which we come to Him.
:::

[]{#part0055_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 303 The holy Christ is born in me today**](#part0004.html#level-573) {#part0055_split_003.html#h1-573 .level1}

^1^ Watch with me, angels; watch with me today. Let all God's holy
Thoughts surround me and be still with me while Heaven's Son is born.
Let earthly sounds be quiet and the sights to which I am accustomed
disappear. Let Christ be welcomed where He is at home, and let Him hear
the sounds He understands and see but sights which show His Father's
Love. Let Him no longer be a stranger here, for He is born again in me
today.

*^2^ Your Son is welcome, Father. He has come to save me from the evil
self I made. He is the Self that You have given me. He is but what I
really am in truth. He is the Son You love above all things. He is my
Self as You created me. It is not Christ that can be crucified. Safe in
Your arms, let me receive Your Son.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 304 Let not my world obscure the sight of Christ**](#part0004.html#level-574) {#part0055_split_004.html#h1-574 .level1}

^1^ I can obscure my holy sight if I intrude my world upon it. Nor can I
behold the holy sights Christ looks upon unless it is His vision that I
use. Perception is a mirror, not a fact. And what I look on is my state
of mind reflected outward. I would bless the world by looking on it
through the eyes of Christ. And I will look upon the certain signs that
all my sins have been forgiven me.

*^2^ You lead me from the darkness to the light, from sin to holiness.
Let me forgive and thus receive salvation for the world. It is Your
gift, my Father, given me to offer to Your holy Son that he may find
again the memory of You and of Your Son as You created him.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 305 There is a peace that Christ bestows on us**](#part0004.html#level-575) {#part0055_split_005.html#h1-575 .level1}

^1^ Who uses but Christ's vision finds a peace so deep and quiet,
undisturbable and wholly changeless that the world contains no
counterpart. Comparisons are still before this peace. And all the world
departs in silence as this peace envelops it and gently carries it to
truth, no more to be the home of fear. For Love has come and healed the
world by giving it Christ's peace.

*^2^ Father, the peace of Christ is given us because it is Your Will
that we be saved. Help us today but to accept Your gift and judge it
not. For it has come to us to save us from our judgment on ourselves.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 306 The gift of Christ is all I seek today**](#part0004.html#level-576) {#part0055_split_006.html#h1-576 .level1}

^1^ What but Christ's vision would I use today when it can offer me a
day in which I see a world so like to Heaven that an ancient memory
returns to me? Today I can forget the world I made. Today I can go past
all fear and be restored to love and holiness and peace. Today I am
redeemed and born anew into a world of mercy and of care; of loving
kindness and the peace of God.

*^2^ And so, our Father, we return to You, remembering we never went
away, remembering Your holy gifts to us. In gratitude and thankfulness,
we come, with empty hands and open hearts and minds, asking but what You
give. We cannot make an offering sufficient for Your Son. But in Your
Love the gift of Christ is his.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 307 Conflicting wishes cannot be my will**](#part0004.html#level-577) {#part0055_split_007.html#h1-577 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Your Will is mine, and only that. There is no other will
for me to have. Let me not try to make another will, for it is senseless
and will cause me pain. Your Will alone can bring me happiness, and only
Yours exists. If I would have what only You can give, I must accept Your
Will for me and enter into peace, where conflict is impossible. Your Son
is one with You in being and in will, and nothing contradicts the holy
truth that I remain as You created me.*

^2^ And with this prayer, we enter silently into a state where conflict
cannot come because we join our holy will with God's in recognition that
they are but one.
:::

[]{#part0055_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 308 This instant is the only time there is**](#part0004.html#level-578) {#part0055_split_008.html#h1-578 .level1}

^1^ I have conceived of time in such a way that I defeat my aim. If I
elect to reach past time to timelessness, I must change my perception of
what time is for. Time's purpose cannot be to keep the past and future
one. The only interval in which I can be saved from time is now. For in
this instant has forgiveness come to set me free. The birth of Christ is
now, without a past or future. He has come to give His present blessing
to the world, restoring it to timelessness and love. And love is
ever-present, here and now.

*^2^ Thanks for this instant, Father. It is now I am redeemed. This
instant is the time You have appointed for Your Son's release and for
salvation of the world in him.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 309 I will not fear to look within today**](#part0004.html#level-579) {#part0055_split_009.html#h1-579 .level1}

^1^ Within me is eternal innocence because it is God's Will that it be
there forever and forever. I, His Son, whose will is limitless as is His
own, can will no change in this. For to deny my Father's Will is to deny
my own. To look within is but to find my will as God created it and as
it is. I fear to look within because I think I made another will which
is not true and made it real. Yet it has no effects. Within me is the
holiness of God. Within me is the memory of Him.

*^2^ The step I take today, my Father, is my sure release from idle
dreams of sin. Your altar stands serene and undefiled. It is the holy
altar to my Self, and there I find my true identity.*
:::

[]{#part0055_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 310 In fearlessness and love I spend today**](#part0004.html#level-580) {#part0055_split_010.html#h1-580 .level1}

*^1^ This day, my Father, would I spend with You, as You have chosen all
my days should be. And what I will experience is not of time at all. The
joy that comes to me is not of days nor hours, for it comes from Heaven
to Your Son. This day will be Your sweet reminder to remember You, Your
gracious calling to Your holy Son, the sign Your grace has come to me,
and that it is Your Will that I be free today.*

^2^ We spend this day together, you and I. And all the world joins with
us in our song of thankfulness and joy to Him Who gave salvation to us,
and Who set us free. We are restored to peace and holiness. There is no
room in us for fear today, for we have welcomed love into our hearts.
:::

[]{#part0056_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**10. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} L[AST]{.small} J[UDGMENT]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-41) {#part0056_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST311:1^ Second Coming gives the Son of God the gift to hear the Voice
for God proclaim that what is false is false and what is true has never
changed. And this the judgment is in which perception ends. At first you
see a world which has accepted this as true, projected from a now
corrected mind. And with this holy sight, perception gives a silent
blessing and then disappears, its goal accomplished and its mission
done.

^2^ The final judgment on the world contains no condemnation. For it
sees the world as totally forgiven, without sin and wholly purposeless.
Without a cause and now without a function in Christ's sight, it merely
slips away to nothingness. There it was born, and there it ends as well.
And all the figures in the dream in which the world began go with it.
Bodies now are useless and will therefore fade away because the Son of
God is limitless.

^3^ You who believed that God's Last Judgment would condemn the world to
hell along with you, accept this holy truth: God's Judgment is the gift
of the correction He bestowed on all your errors, freeing you from them
and all effects they ever seemed to have. To fear God's saving grace is
but to fear complete release from suffering, return to peace, security
and happiness, and union with your own identity.

^4^ God's Final Judgment is as merciful as every step in His appointed
plan to bless His Son and call him to return to the eternal peace He
shares with him. Be not afraid of love. For it alone can heal all
sorrow, wipe away all tears, and gently waken from his dream of pain the
Son whom God acknowledges as His. Be not afraid of this. Salvation asks
you give it welcome. And the world awaits your glad acceptance, which
will set it free.

^5^ This is God's Final Judgment: "You are still My holy Son, forever
innocent, forever loving and forever loved, as limitless as your Creator
and completely changeless and forever pure. Therefore awaken and return
to Me. I am your Father and you are My Son."
:::

[]{#part0056_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 311 I judge all things as I would have them be**](#part0004.html#level-581) {#part0056_split_001.html#h1-581 .level1}

^1^ Judgment was made to be a weapon used against the truth. It
separates what it is being used against and sets it off as if it were a
thing apart. And then it makes of it what you would have it be. It
judges what it cannot understand because it cannot see totality and
therefore judges falsely. Let us not use it today but make a gift of it
to Him Who has a different use for it. He will relieve you of the agony
of all the judgments you have made against yourself and re-establish
peace of mind by giving you God's Judgment of His Son.

*^2^ Father, we wait with open mind today to hear Your Judgment of the
Son You love. We do not know him, and we cannot judge. And so we let
Your Love decide what he whom You created as Your Son must be.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 312 I see all things as I would have them be**](#part0004.html#level-582) {#part0056_split_002.html#h1-582 .level1}

^1^ Perception follows judgment. Having judged, you therefore see what
you would look upon. For sight can merely serve to offer you what you
would have. It is impossible to overlook what you would see and fail to
see what you have chosen to behold. How surely, therefore, must the real
world come to greet the holy sight of anyone who takes the Holy Spirit's
purpose as his goal for seeing. And he cannot fail to look upon what
Christ would have him see and share Christ's love for what he looks
upon.

*^2^ I have no purpose for today except to look upon a liberated world,
set free from all the judgments I have made. Father, this is Your Will
for me today, and therefore it must be my goal as well.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 313 Now let a new perception come to me**](#part0004.html#level-583) {#part0056_split_003.html#h1-583 .level1}

*^1^ Father, there is a vision which beholds all things as sinless, so
that fear has gone and where it was is love invited in. And love will
come wherever it is asked. This vision is Your gift. The eyes of Christ
look on a world forgiven. In His sight are all its sins forgiven, for He
sees no sin in anything He looks upon. Now let His true perception come
to me that I may waken from the dream of guilt and look within upon my
sinlessness which You have kept completely undefiled upon the altar to
Your holy Son, the Self with which I would identify.*

^2^ Let us today behold each other in the sight of Christ. How beautiful
we are! How holy and how loving! Brother, come and join with me today.
We save the world when we are joined. For in our vision it becomes as
holy as the light in us.
:::

[]{#part0056_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 314 I seek a future different from the past**](#part0004.html#level-584) {#part0056_split_004.html#h1-584 .level1}

^1^ From new perception of the world there comes a future very different
from the past. The future now is recognized as but extension of the
present. Past mistakes can cast no shadows on it, so that fear has lost
its idols and its images, and being formless, it has no effects. Death
will not claim the future now, for life is now its goal, and all the
needed means are happily provided. Who can grieve or suffer when the
present has been freed, extending its security and peace into a quiet
future filled with hope?

*^2^ Father, we were mistaken in the past and choose to use the present
to be free. Now do we leave the future in Your hands, leaving behind our
past mistakes and sure that You will keep Your present promises and
guide the future in their holy light.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 315 All gifts my brothers give belong to me**](#part0004.html#level-585) {#part0056_split_005.html#h1-585 .level1}

^1^ Each day a thousand treasures come to me with every passing moment.
I am blessed with gifts throughout the day, in value far beyond all
things of which I can conceive. A brother smiles upon another, and my
heart is gladdened. Someone speaks a word of gratitude or mercy, and my
mind perceives this gift and takes it as its own. And everyone who finds
the way to God becomes my savior, pointing out the way to me and giving
me his certainty that what he learned is surely mine as well.

*^2^ I thank You, Father, for the many gifts that come to me today and
every day from every Son of God. My brothers are unlimited in all their
gifts to me. Now may I offer them my thankfulness that gratitude to them
may lead me on to my Creator and His memory.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 316 All gifts I give my brothers are my own**](#part0004.html#level-586) {#part0056_split_006.html#h1-586 .level1}

^1^ As every gift my brothers give is mine, so every gift I give belongs
to me. Each one allows a past mistake to go and leave no shadow on the
holy mind my Father loves. His grace is given me in every gift a brother
has received throughout all time and past all time as well. My treasure
house is full, and angels watch its open doors that not one gift is lost
and only more are added. Let me come to where my treasures are and enter
in where I am truly welcome and at home among the gifts that God has
given me.

*^2^ Father, I would accept Your gifts today. I do not recognize them.
Yet I trust that You Who gave them will provide the means by which I can
behold them, see their worth, and cherish only them as what I want.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 317 I follow in the way appointed me**](#part0004.html#level-587) {#part0056_split_007.html#h1-587 .level1}

^1^ I have a special place to fill-a role for me alone. Salvation waits
until I take this part as what I choose to do. Until I make this choice,
I am the slave of time and human destiny. But when I willingly and
gladly go the way my Father's plan appointed me to go, then will I
recognize salvation is already here, already given all my brothers and
already mine as well.

*^2^ Father, Your way is what I choose today. Where it would lead me, do
I choose to go; what it would have me do, I choose to do. Your way is
certain and the end secure. The memory of You awaits me there, and all
my sorrows end in Your embrace, which You have promised to Your Son, who
thought mistakenly that he had wandered from the sure protection of Your
loving arms.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 318 In me salvation' means and end are one**](#part0004.html#level-588) {#part0056_split_008.html#h1-588 .level1}

^1^ In me, God's holy Son, are reconciled all parts of Heaven's plan to
save the world. What could conflict when all the parts have but one
purpose and one aim? How could there be a single part that stands aside
or one of more or less importance than the rest? I am the means by which
God's Son is saved because salvation's purpose is to find the
sinlessness which God has placed in me. I was created as the thing I
seek. I am the goal the world is searching for. I am God's Son, His one
Eternal Love. I am salvation's means and end as well.

*^2^ Let me today, my Father, take the role You offer me in Your request
that I accept Atonement for myself. For thus does what is thereby
reconciled in me become as surely reconciled to You.*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 319 I came for the salvation of the world**](#part0004.html#level-589) {#part0056_split_009.html#h1-589 .level1}

^1^ Here is a thought from which all arrogance has been removed, and
only truth is left. For arrogance opposes truth. But where there is no
arrogance, the truth will come immediately and fill up the space the ego
left unoccupied by lies. Only the ego can be limited, and therefore it
must seek for aims which are curtailed and limiting. The ego thinks that
what one gains totality must lose. And yet it is the Will of God I learn
that what one gains is given unto all.

*^2^ Father, Your Will is total. And the goal that stems from it shares
its totality. What aim but the salvation of the world could You have
given me? And what but this could be the Will my Self has shared with
You?*
:::

[]{#part0056_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 320 My Father gives all power unto me**](#part0004.html#level-590) {#part0056_split_010.html#h1-590 .level1}

^1^ The Son of God is limitless. There are no limits on his strength,
his peace, his joy, or any attributes his Father gave in his creation.
What he wills with his Creator and Redeemer must be done. His holy will
can never be denied because his Father shines upon his mind and lays
before it all the strength and love in earth and Heaven. I am he to whom
all this is given. I am he in whom the power of my Father's Will abides.

*^2^ Your Will can do all things in me and then extend to all the world
as well through me. There is no limit on Your Will. And so all power has
been given to Your Son.*
:::

[]{#part0057_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**11. W[HAT IS]{.small} C[REATION]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-42) {#part0057_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST321:1^ Creation is the sum of all God's Thoughts, in number infinite
and everywhere without all limit. Only Love creates and only like
Itself. There was no time when all that It created was not there. Nor
will there be a time when anything that It created suffers any pain.
Forever and forever are God's Thoughts exactly as they were and as they
are, unchanged through time and after time is done.

^2^ God's Thoughts are given all the power that Their own Creator has.
For He would add to Love by its extension. Thus His Son shares in
creation, and must therefore share in power to create. What God has
willed be forever one will still be one when time is over and will not
be changed throughout the course of time, remaining as it was before the
thought of time began.

^3^ Creation is the opposite of all illusions, for Creation is the
truth. Creation is the holy Son of God, for in Creation is His Will
complete in every aspect, making every part container of the whole. Its
oneness is forever guaranteed inviolate, forever held within His holy
Will beyond all possibility of harm, of separation, imperfection, and of
any spot upon its sinlessness. We are Creation-we the Sons of God.

^4^ We seem to be discrete and unaware of our eternal unity with Him.
Yet back of all our doubts, past all our fears, there still is
certainty. For Love remains with all Its Thoughts, Its sureness being
theirs. God's memory is in our holy minds, which know their oneness and
their unity with their Creator. Let our function be only to let this
memory return, only to let God's Will be done on earth, only to be
restored to sanity, and to be but as God created us.

^5^ Our Father calls to us. We hear His Voice, and we forgive creation
in the name of its Creator, Holiness Itself, Whose holiness His own
creation shares; Whose holiness is still a part of us.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 321 Father, my freedom is in You alone**](#part0004.html#level-591) {#part0057_split_001.html#h1-591 .level1}

*^6^ I did not understand what made me free nor what my freedom is nor
where to look to find it. Father, I have searched in vain until I heard
Your Voice directing me. Now I would guide myself no more. For I have
neither made nor understood the way to find my freedom. But I trust in
You. You Who endowed me with my freedom as Your holy Son will not be
lost to me. Your Voice directs me. And the way to You is opening and
clear to me at last. Father, my freedom is in You alone. Father, it is
my will that I return.*

^7^ Today we answer for the world, which will be freed along with us.
How glad are we to find our freedom through the certain way our Father
has established. And how sure is all the world's salvation when we learn
our freedom can be found in God alone.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 322 I can give up but what was never real**](#part0004.html#level-592) {#part0057_split_002.html#h1-592 .level1}

^1^ I sacrifice illusions, nothing more. And as illusions go, I find the
gifts illusions tried to hide, awaiting me in shining welcome and in
readiness to give God's ancient messages to me. His memory abides in
every gift that I receive of Him. And every dream serves only to conceal
the Self which is God's only Son, the likeness of Himself, the Holy One
who still abides in Him forever, as He still abides in me.

*^2^ Father, to You all sacrifice remains forever inconceivable. And so
I cannot sacrifice except in dreams. As You created me, I can give up
nothing You gave me. What You did not give has no reality. What loss can
I anticipate except the loss of fear and the return of Love into my
mind?*
:::

[]{#part0057_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 323 I gladly make the "sacrifice" of fear**](#part0004.html#level-593) {#part0057_split_003.html#h1-593 .level1}

*^1^ Here is the only "sacrifice" You ask of Your beloved Son-You ask
him to give up all suffering, all sense of loss and sadness, all anxiety
and doubt and freely let Your Love come streaming in to his awareness,
healing him of pain and giving him Your own eternal joy. Such is the
"sacrifice" You ask of me, and one I gladly make, the only "cost" of
restoration of Your memory to me for the salvation of the world.*

^2^ And as we pay the debt we owe to truth-a debt which merely is the
letting-go of self-deceptions and of images we worshipped falsely-truth
returns to us in wholeness and in joy. We are deceived no longer. Love
has now returned to our awareness. And we are at peace again, for fear
has gone and only love remains.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 324 I merely follow, for I would not lead**](#part0004.html#level-594) {#part0057_split_004.html#h1-594 .level1}

*^1^ Father, You are the One Who gave the plan for my salvation to me.
You have set the way I am to go, the role to take, and every step in my
appointed path. I cannot lose the way. I can but choose to wander off a
while and then return. Your loving Voice will always call me back and
guide my feet aright. My brothers all can follow in the way I lead them.
Yet I merely follow in the way to You as You direct me and would have me
go.*

^2^ So let us follow One Who knows the way. We need not tarry, and we
cannot stray except an instant from His loving hand. We walk together,
for we follow Him. And it is He Who makes the ending sure and guarantees
a safe returning home.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 325 All things I think I see reflect ideas**](#part0004.html#level-595) {#part0057_split_005.html#h1-595 .level1}

^1^ This is salvation's keynote: What I see reflects a process in my
mind which starts with my idea of what I want. From there, the mind
makes up an image of the thing the mind desires, judges valuable, and
therefore seeks to find. These images are then projected outward, looked
upon, esteemed as real, and guarded as one's own. From insane wishes
comes an insane world. From judgment comes a world condemned. And from
forgiving thoughts a gentle world comes forth, with mercy for the holy
Son of God, to offer him a kindly home where he can rest a while before
he journeys on and help his brothers walk ahead with him and find the
way to Heaven and to God.

*^2^ Our Father, Your Ideas reflect the truth, and mine apart from Yours
but make up dreams. Let me behold what only Yours reflect, for Yours and
Yours alone establish truth.*
:::

[]{#part0057_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 326 I am forever an effect of God**](#part0004.html#level-596) {#part0057_split_006.html#h1-596 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I was created in Your Mind, a holy Thought that never left
its home. I am forever Your Effect, and You forever and forever are my
Cause. As You created me, I have remained. Where You established me, I
still abide, and all Your attributes abide in me because it is Your Will
to have a Son so like his Cause that Cause and Its Effect are
indistinguishable. Let me know that I am an Effect of God, and so I have
the power to create like You. And as it is in Heaven, so on earth. Your
plan I follow here, and at the end I know that You will gather Your
Effects into the tranquil Heaven of Your Love, where earth will
disappear and separate thoughts unite in glory as the Son of God.*

^2^ Let us today behold earth disappear, at first transformed, and then,
forgiven, fade entirely into God's holy Will.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 327 I but call and You will answer me**](#part0004.html#level-597) {#part0057_split_007.html#h1-597 .level1}

^1^ I am not asked to take salvation on the basis of an unsupported
faith. For God has promised He will hear my call and answer me Himself.
Let me but learn from my experience that this is true, and faith in Him
must surely come to me. This is the faith that will endure and take me
farther and still farther on the road that leads to Him. For thus I will
be sure that He has not abandoned me and loves me still, awaiting but my
call to give me all the help I need to come to Him.

*^2^ Father, I thank You that Your promises will never fail in my
experience if I but test them out. Let me attempt therefore to try them
and to judge them not. Your Word is one with You. You give the means
whereby conviction comes, and surety of Your abiding Love is gained at
last.*
:::

[]{#part0057_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 328 I choose the second place to gain the first**](#part0004.html#level-598) {#part0057_split_008.html#h1-598 .level1}

^1^ What seems to be the second place is first, for all things we
perceive are upside down until we listen to the Voice of God. It seems
that we will gain autonomy but by our striving to be separate and that
our independence from the rest of God's creation is the way in which
salvation is obtained. Yet all we find is sickness, suffering and loss,
and death. This is not what our Father wills for us, nor is there any
second to His Will. To join with His is but to find our own. And since
our will is His, it is to Him that we must go to recognize our will.

*^2^ There is no will but Yours. And I am glad that nothing I imagine
contradicts what You would have me do. It is Your Will that I be wholly
safe, eternally at peace. And happily I share that Will which You, my
Father, gave as part of me.*
:::

[]{#part0057_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 329 I have already chosen what You will**](#part0004.html#level-599) {#part0057_split_009.html#h1-599 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I thought I wandered from Your Will, defied it, broke its
laws, and interposed a second will more powerful than Yours. Yet what I
am in truth is but Your Will, extended and extending. This am I. And
this will never change. As You are One, so am I one with You. And this I
chose in my creation, where my will became forever one with Yours. That
choice was made for all eternity. It cannot change and be in opposition
to itself. Father, my will is Yours. And I am safe, untroubled and
serene in endless joy because it is Your Will that it be so.*

^2^ Today we will accept our union with each other and our Source. We
have no will apart from His, and all of us are one because His Will is
shared by all of us. Through it we recognize that we are one. Through it
we find our way at last to God.
:::

[]{#part0057_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 330 I will not hurt myself again today**](#part0004.html#level-600) {#part0057_split_010.html#h1-600 .level1}

^1^ Let us this day accept forgiveness as our only function. Why should
we attack our minds and give them images of pain? Why should we teach
them they are powerless when God holds out His power and His Love and
bids them take what is already theirs? The mind that is made willing to
accept God's gifts has been restored to Spirit and extends its freedom
and its joy, as is the Will of God united with its own. The Self which
God created cannot sin and therefore cannot suffer. Let us choose today
that He be our identity and thus escape forever from all things the
dream of fear appears to offer us.

*^2^ Father, Your Son cannot be hurt. And if we think we suffer, we but
fail to know our one Identity we share with You. We would return to It
today, to be made free forever from all our mistakes and to be saved
from what we thought we were.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**12. W[HAT IS THE]{.small} E[GO]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-43) {#part0058_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST331:1^ The ego is idolatry-the sign of limited and separated self,
born in a body, doomed to suffer and to end its life in death. It is the
will that sees the Will of God as enemy and takes a form in which It is
denied. The ego is the "proof" that strength is weak and love is
fearful, life is really death, and what opposes God alone is true.

^2^ The ego is insane. In fear it stands beyond the Everywhere, apart
from All, in separation from the Infinite. In its insanity it thinks it
has become a victor over God Himself, and in its terrible autonomy, it
"sees" the Will of God has been destroyed. It dreams of punishment and
trembles at the figures in its dreams, its enemies who seek to murder it
before it can ensure its safety by attacking them.

^3^ The Son of God is egoless. What can he know of madness and the death
of God when he abides in Him? What can he know of sorrow and of
suffering when he lives in eternal joy? What can he know of fear and
punishment, of sin and guilt, of hatred and attack when all there is
surrounding him is everlasting peace, forever conflict-free and
undisturbed in deepest silence and tranquillity?

^4^ To know Reality is not to see the ego and its thoughts, its works,
its acts, its laws and its beliefs, its dreams, its hopes, its plans for
its salvation, and the cost belief in it entails. In suffering, the
price for faith in it is so immense that crucifixion of the Son of God
is offered daily at its darkened shrine and blood must flow before the
altar where its sickly followers prepare for death.

^5^ Yet will one lily of forgiveness change the darkness into light, the
altar to illusions to the shrine of Life Itself. And peace will be
restored forever to the holy minds which God created as His Son, His
dwelling-place, His joy, His love, completely His, completely one with
Him.
:::

[]{#part0058_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 331 There is no conflict, for my will is Yours**](#part0004.html#level-601) {#part0058_split_001.html#h1-601 .level1}

*^1^ How foolish, Father, to believe Your Son could cause himself to
suffer! Could he make a plan for his damnation and be left without a
certain way to his release? You love me, Father. You could never leave
me desolate, to die within a world of pain and cruelty. How could I
think that Love has left Itself? There is no will except the Will of
Love. Fear is a dream and has no will that can conflict with Yours.
Conflict is sleep, and peace awakening. Death is illusion; life, Eternal
Truth. There is no opposition to Your Will. There is no conflict, for my
will is Yours.*

^2^ Forgiveness shows us that God's Will is one and that we share it.
Let us look upon the holy sights forgiveness shows today that we may
find the peace of God. Amen.
:::

[]{#part0058_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 332 Fear binds the world. Forgiveness sets it free**](#part0004.html#level-602) {#part0058_split_002.html#h1-602 .level1}

^1^ The ego makes illusions. Truth undoes its evil dreams by shining
them away. Truth never makes attack. It merely is. And by its presence
is the mind recalled from fantasies, awaking to the Real. Forgiveness
bids this presence enter in and take its rightful place within the mind.
Without forgiveness is the mind in chains, believing in its own
futility. Yet with forgiveness does the light shine through the dream of
darkness, offering it hope and giving it the means to realize the
freedom that is its inheritance.

*^2^ We would not bind the world again today. Fear holds it prisoner.
And yet Your Love has given us the means to set it free. Father, we
would release it now. For as we offer freedom, it is given us. And we
would not remain as prisoners while You hold out our freedom unto us.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 333 Forgiveness ends the dream of conflict here**](#part0004.html#level-603) {#part0058_split_003.html#h1-603 .level1}

^1^ Conflict must be resolved. It cannot be evaded, set aside, denied,
disguised, seen somewhere else, called by another name, nor hidden by
deceit of any kind if it would be escaped. It must be seen exactly as it
is, where it is thought to be, in the reality which has been given it,
and with the purpose that the mind accorded it. For only then are its
defenses lifted and the truth can shine upon it as it disappears.

*^2^ Father, forgiveness is the light You chose to shine away all
conflict and all doubt and light the way for our return to You. No light
but this can end our evil dreams. No light but this can save the world.
For this alone will never fail in anything, being Your gift to Your
beloved Son.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 334 Today I claim the gifts forgiveness gives**](#part0004.html#level-604) {#part0058_split_004.html#h1-604 .level1}

^1^ I will not wait another day to find the treasures which my Father
offers me. Illusions must be vain and dreams are gone, even while they
are woven out of thoughts that rest on false perception. Let me not
accept such meager gifts again today. God's Voice is offering the peace
of God to all who hear and choose to follow Him. This is my choice
today. And so I go to find the treasures God has given me.

*^2^ I seek but the eternal. For Your Son can be content with nothing
less than this. What then can be his solace but what You are offering to
his bewildered mind and frightened heart, to give him certainty and
bring him peace? Today I would behold my brother sinless. This Your Will
for me, for thus will I behold my sinlessness.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 335 I choose to see my brother's sinlessness**](#part0004.html#level-605) {#part0058_split_005.html#h1-605 .level1}

^1^ Forgiveness is a choice. I never see my brother as he is, for that
is far beyond perception. What I see in him is merely what I wish to see
because it stands for what I want to be the truth. It is to this alone
that I respond, however much I seem to be impelled by outside
happenings. I choose to see what I would look upon, and this I see and
only this. My brother's sinlessness shows me that I would look upon my
own. And I will see it, having chosen to behold my brother in its holy
light.

*^2^ What could restore Your memory to me except to see my brother's
sinlessness? His holiness reminds me that he was created one with me and
like myself. In him I find my Self, and in Your Son I find the memory of
You as well.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 336 Forgiveness lets me know that minds are joined**](#part0004.html#level-606) {#part0058_split_006.html#h1-606 .level1}

^1^ Forgiveness is the means appointed for perception's ending.
Knowledge is restored after perception first is changed and then gives
way entirely to what remains forever past its highest reach. For sights
and sounds at best can serve but to recall the memory that lies beyond
them all. Forgiveness sweeps away distortions and opens the hidden altar
to the truth. Its lilies shine into the mind and call it to return and
look within, to find what it has vainly sought without. For here and
only here is peace of mind restored, for this the dwelling-place of God
Himself.

*^2^ In quiet may forgiveness wipe away my dreams of separation and of
sin. Then let me, Father, look within and find Your promise of my
sinlessness is kept; Your Word remains unchanged within my mind; Your
Love is still abiding in my heart.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 337 My sinlessness protects me from all harm**](#part0004.html#level-607) {#part0058_split_007.html#h1-607 .level1}

^1^ My sinlessness ensures me perfect peace, eternal safety, everlasting
love, freedom forever from all thought of loss, complete deliverance
from suffering. And only happiness can be my state, for only happiness
is given me. What must I do to know all this is mine? I must accept
Atonement for myself and nothing more. God has already done all things
that need be done. And I must learn I need do nothing of myself, for I
need but accept my Self, my sinlessness, created for me, now already
mine, to feel God's Love protecting me from harm, to understand my
Father loves His Son, to know I am the Son my Father loves.

*^2^ You who created me in sinlessness are not mistaken about what I am.
I was mistaken when I thought I sinned, but I accept Atonement for
myself. Father, my dream is ended now. Amen.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 338 I am affected only by my thoughts**](#part0004.html#level-608) {#part0058_split_008.html#h1-608 .level1}

^1^ It needs but this to let salvation come to all the world. For in
this single thought is everyone released at last from fear. Now he has
learned that no one frightens him and nothing can endanger him. He has
no enemies, and he is safe from all external things. His thoughts can
frighten him, but since these thoughts belong to him alone, he has the
power to change them and exchange each fear thought for a happy thought
of love. He crucified himself. Yet God has planned that His beloved Son
will be redeemed.

*^2^ Your plan is sure, my Father-only Yours. All other plans will fail.
And I will have thoughts that will frighten me until I learn that You
have given me the only thought which leads me to salvation. Mine alone
will fail and lead me nowhere. But the thought You gave me promises to
lead me home, because it holds Your promise to Your Son.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 339 I will receive whatever I request**](#part0004.html#level-609) {#part0058_split_009.html#h1-609 .level1}

^1^ No one desires pain. But he can think that pain is pleasure. No one
would avoid his happiness. But he can think that joy is painful,
threatening, and dangerous. Everyone will receive what he requests. But
he can be confused indeed about the things he wants, the state he would
attain. What can he then request that he would want when he receives it?
He has asked for what will frighten him and bring him suffering. Let us
resolve today to ask for what we really want, and only this, that we may
spend this day in fearlessness, without confusing pain with joy or fear
with love.

*^2^ Father, this is Your day. It is a day in which I would do nothing
by myself but hear Your Voice in everything I do; requesting only what
You offer me, accepting only thoughts You share with me.*
:::

[]{#part0058_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 340 I can be free of suffering today**](#part0004.html#level-610) {#part0058_split_010.html#h1-610 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I thank You for today and for the freedom I am certain it
will bring. This day is holy, for today Your Son will be redeemed. His
suffering is done. For he will hear Your Voice directing him to find
Christ's vision through forgiveness and be free forever from all
suffering. Thanks for today, my Father. I was born into this world but
to achieve this day and what it holds in joy and freedom for Your holy
Son and for the world he made, which is released along with him today.*

^2^ Be glad today! Be glad! There is no room for anything but joy and
thanks today. Our Father has redeemed His Son this day! Not one of us
but will be saved today. Not one who will remain in fear, and none the
Father will not gather to Himself, awake in Heaven in the Heart of Love.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**13. W[HAT IS A]{.small} M[IRACLE]{.small}?**](#part0004.html#chap-44) {#part0059_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^ST341:1^ A miracle is a correction. It does not create nor really
change at all. It merely looks on devastation, and reminds the mind that
what it sees is false. It undoes error, but does not attempt to go
beyond perception nor exceed the function of forgiveness. Thus it stays
within time's limits. Yet it paves the way for the return of
timelessness and love's awakening, for fear must slip away under the
gentle remedy it gives.

^2^ A miracle contains the gift of grace, for it is given and received
as one. And thus it illustrates the law of truth the world does not obey
because it fails entirely to understand its ways. A miracle inverts
perception which was upside-down before, and thus it ends the strange
distortions that were manifest. Now is perception open to the truth. Now
is forgiveness seen as justified.

^3^ Forgiveness is the home of miracles. The eyes of Christ deliver them
to all they look upon in mercy and in love. Perception stands corrected
in His sight, and what was meant to curse has come to bless. Each lily
of forgiveness offers all the world the silent miracle of love. And each
is laid before the Word of God upon the universal altar to Creator and
creation, in the light of perfect purity and endless joy.

^4^ The miracle is taken first on faith because to ask for it implies
the mind has been made ready to conceive of what it cannot see and does
not understand. Yet faith will bring its witnesses to show that what it
rested on is really there. And thus the miracle will justify your faith
in it and show it rested on a world more real than what you saw before-a
world redeemed from what you thought you saw.

^5^ Miracles fall like drops of healing rain from Heaven on a dry and
dusty world, where starved and thirsty creatures came to die. Now they
have water. Now the world is green. And everywhere the signs of life
spring up to show that what is born can never die, for what has life has
immortality.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 341 I can attack but my own sinlessness, and it is only that which keeps me safe**](#part0004.html#level-611) {#part0059_split_001.html#h1-611 .level1}

*^1^ Father, Your Son is holy. I am he on whom You smile in love and
tenderness so deep and dear and still the universe smiles back on You
and shares Your holiness. How pure, how safe, how sacred then are we,
abiding in Your smile, with all Your Love bestowed upon us, living one
with You in brotherhood and Fatherhood complete, in sinlessness so
perfect that the Lord of Sinlessness conceives us as His Son, a universe
of Thought completing Him.*

^2^ Let us not then attack our sinlessness, for it contains the Word of
God to us, and in its kind reflection we are saved.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 342 I let forgiveness rest upon all things, for thus forgiveness will be given me**](#part0004.html#level-612) {#part0059_split_002.html#h1-612 .level1}

*^1^ I thank You, Father, for Your plan to save me from the hell I made.
It is not real. And You have given me the means to prove its unreality
to me. The key is in my hand, and I have reached the door beyond which
lies the end of dreams. I stand before the gate of Heaven, wondering if
I should enter in and be at home. Let me not wait again today. Let me
forgive all things, and let creation be as You would have it be and as
it is. Let me remember that I am Your Son, and opening the door at last,
forget illusions in the blazing light of truth, as memory of You returns
to me.*

^2^ Brother, forgive me now. I come to you to take you home with me. And
as we go, the world goes with us on the way to God.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 343 I am not asked to make a sacrifice to find the mercy and the peace of God**](#part0004.html#level-613) {#part0059_split_003.html#h1-613 .level1}

*^1^ The end of suffering cannot be loss. The gift of everything can but
be gain. You only give. You never take away. And You created me to be
like You, so sacrifice becomes impossible for me as well as You. I too
must give, and so all things are given unto me forever and forever. As I
was created, I remain. Your Son can make no sacrifice, for he must be
complete, having the function of completing You. I am complete because I
am Your Son. I cannot lose, for I can only give. And everything is mine
eternally.*

^2^ The mercy and the peace of God are free. Salvation has no cost. It
is a gift that must be freely given and received, and it is this that we
would learn today.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 344 Today I learn the law of love; that what I give my brother is my gift to me**](#part0004.html#level-614) {#part0059_split_004.html#h1-614 .level1}

*^1^ This is Your law, my Father, not my own. I did not understand what
giving means and thought to save what I desired for myself alone. And as
I looked upon the treasure that I thought I had, I found an empty place
where nothing ever was or is or will be. Who can share a dream? And what
can an illusion offer me? Yet he whom I forgive will give me gifts
beyond the worth of anything on earth. Let my forgiven brothers fill my
store with Heaven's treasures, which alone are real. Thus is the law of
love fulfilled. And thus Your Son arises and returns to You.*

^2^ How near we are to one another, as we go to God. How near is He to
us. How close the ending of the dream of sin and the redemption of the
Son of God.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 345 I offer only miracles today, for I would have them be returned to me**](#part0004.html#level-615) {#part0059_split_005.html#h1-615 .level1}

*^1^ Father, a miracle reflects Your gifts to me, Your Son. And every
one I give returns to me, reminding me the law of love is universal.
Even here it takes a form which can be recognized and seen to work. The
miracles I give are given back in just the form I need to help me with
the problems I perceive. Father, in Heaven it is different, for there,
there are no needs. But here on earth, the miracle is closer to Your
gifts than any other gift which I can give. Then let me give this gift
alone today, which, born of true forgiveness, lights the way that I must
travel to remember You.*

^2^ Peace to all seeking hearts today. The light has come to offer
miracles to bless the tired world. It will find rest today, for we will
offer what we have received.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 346 Today the peace of God envelops me, and I forget all things except His Love**](#part0004.html#level-616) {#part0059_split_006.html#h1-616 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I wake today with miracles correcting my perception of all
things. And so begins the day I share with You as I will share eternity,
for time has stepped aside today. I do not seek the things of time, and
so I will not look upon them. What I seek today transcends all laws of
time and things perceived in time. I would forget all things except Your
Love. I would abide in You and know no laws except Your law of Love. And
I would find the peace which You created for Your Son, forgetting all
the foolish toys I made as I behold Your glory and my own.*

^2^ And when the evening comes today, we will remember nothing but the
peace of God. For we will learn today what peace is ours when we forget
all things except God's Love.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 347 Anger must come from judgment. Judgment is the weapon I would use against myself to keep all miracles away from me**](#part0004.html#level-617) {#part0059_split_007.html#h1-617 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I want what goes against my will and do not want what is my
will to have. Straighten my mind, my Father. It is sick. But You have
offered freedom, and I choose to claim Your gift today. And so I give
all judgment to the One You gave to me to judge for me. He sees what I
behold, and yet He knows the truth. He looks on pain, and yet He
understands it is not real, and in His understanding it is healed. He
gives the miracles my dreams would hide from my awareness. Let Him judge
today. I do not know my will, but He is sure it is Your own. And He will
speak for me, and call Your miracle to come to me.*

^2^ Listen today. Be very still and hear the gentle Voice for God
assuring you that He has judged you as the Son He loves.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 348 I have no cause for anger or for fear, for You surround me. And in every need that I perceive, Your grace suffices me**](#part0004.html#level-618) {#part0059_split_008.html#h1-618 .level1}

*^1^ Father, let me remember You are here, and I am not alone.
Surrounding me is everlasting Love. I have no cause for anything except
the perfect peace and joy I share with You. What need have I for anger
or for fear? Surrounding me is perfect safety. Can I be afraid when Your
eternal promise goes with me? Surrounding me is perfect sinlessness.
What can I fear when You created me in holiness as perfect as Your own?*

^2^ God's grace suffices us in everything that He would have us do. And
only that we choose to be our will as well as His.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 349 Today I let Christ's vision look upon all things for me and judge them not, but give each one a miracle of love instead**](#part0004.html#level-619) {#part0059_split_009.html#h1-619 .level1}

*^1^ So would I liberate all things I see and give to them the freedom
that I seek. For thus do I obey the law of love and give what I would
find and make my own. It will be given me because I have chosen it as
the gift I want to give. Father, Your gifts are mine. Each one that I
accept gives me a miracle to give. And giving as I would receive, I
learn Your healing miracles belong to me.*

^2^ Our Father knows our needs. He gives us grace to meet them all. And
so we trust in Him to send us miracles to bless the world and heal our
minds as we return to Him.
:::

[]{#part0059_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 350 Miracles mirror God's eternal Love. To offer them is to remember Him, and through His memory to save the world**](#part0004.html#level-620) {#part0059_split_010.html#h1-620 .level1}

*^1^ What we forgive becomes a part of us as we perceive ourselves. The
Son of God incorporates all things within himself as You created him.
Your memory depends on his forgiveness. What he is, is unaffected by his
thoughts. But what he looks upon is their direct result. Therefore, my
Father, I would turn to You. Only Your memory will set me free. And only
my forgiveness teaches me to let Your memory return to me and give it to
the world in thankfulness.*

^2^ And as we gather miracles from Him, we will indeed be grateful. For
as we remember Him, His Son will be restored to us in the Reality of
Love.
:::

[]{#part0060_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**14. W[HAT AM]{.small} I?**](#part0004.html#chap-45) {#part0060_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

*^ST351^ I am God's Son, complete and healed and whole, shining in the
reflection of His Love. In me is His creation sanctified and guaranteed
eternal life. In me is love perfected, fear impossible, and joy
established without opposite. I am the holy home of God Himself. I am
the Heaven where His Love resides. I am His holy sinlessness itself, for
in my purity abides His own.*

^2^ Our use for words is almost over now. Yet in the final days of this
one year we gave to God together, you and I, we found a single purpose
that we shared. And thus you joined with me. So what I am are you as
well. The truth of what we are is not for words to speak of nor
describe. Yet we can realize our function here, and words can speak of
this and teach it, too, if we exemplify the words in us.

^3^ We are the bringers of salvation. We accept our part as saviors of
the world, which through our joint forgiveness is redeemed. And this,
our gift, is therefore given us. We look on everyone as brothers and
perceive all things as kindly and as good. We do not seek a function
that is past the gates of Heaven. Knowledge will return when we have
done our part. We are concerned only with giving welcome to the truth.

^4^ Ours are the eyes through which Christ's vision sees a world
redeemed from every thought of sin. Ours are the ears that hear the
Voice of God proclaim the world as sinless. Ours the minds which join
together as we bless the world. And from the oneness that we have
attained we call to all our brothers, asking them to share our peace and
consummate our joy.

^5^ We are the holy messengers of God who speak for Him, and carrying
His Word to everyone whom He has sent to us, we learn that it is written
on our hearts. And thus our minds are changed about the aim for which we
came and which we seek to serve. We bring glad tidings to the Son of
God, who thought he suffered. Now is he redeemed. And as he sees the
gate of Heaven stand open before him, he will enter in and disappear
into the Heart of God.
:::

[]{#part0060_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 351 My sinless brother is my guide to peace. My sinful brother is my guide to pain. And which I choose to see I will behold**](#part0004.html#level-621) {#part0060_split_001.html#h1-621 .level1}

*^1^ Who is my brother but Your holy Son? And if I see him sinful, I
proclaim myself a sinner, not a Son of God, alone and friendless in a
fearful world. Yet this perception is a choice I make and can
relinquish. I can also see my brother sinless as Your holy Son. And with
this choice I see my sinlessness, my everlasting Comforter and Friend
beside me, and my way secure and clear. Choose, then, for me, my Father,
through Your Voice. For He alone gives judgment in Your Name.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 352 Judgment and love are opposites. From one Come all the sorrows of the world. But from The other comes the peace of God Himself**](#part0004.html#level-622) {#part0060_split_002.html#h1-622 .level1}

*^1^ Forgiveness looks on sinlessness alone and judges not. Through this
I come to You. Judgment will bind my eyes and make me blind. Yet love,
reflected in forgiveness here, reminds me You have given me a way to
find Your peace again. I am redeemed when I elect to follow in this way.
You have not left me comfortless. I have within me both the memory of
You and One Who leads me to it. Father, I would hear Your Voice and find
Your peace today. For I would love my own Identity and find in Him the
memory of You.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 353 My eyes, my tongue, my hands, my feet today have but one purpose --- to be given Christ to use to bless the world with miracles**](#part0004.html#level-623) {#part0060_split_003.html#h1-623 .level1}

*^1^ Father, I give all that is mine today to Christ to use in any way
that best will serve the purpose that I share with Him. Nothing is mine
alone, for He and I have joined in purpose. Thus has learning come
almost to its appointed end. A while I work with Him to serve His
purpose. Then I lose myself in my identity and recognize that Christ is
but my Self.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 354 We stand together, Christ and I, in peace And certainty of purpose. And in Him Is His Creator, as He is in me**](#part0004.html#level-624) {#part0060_split_004.html#h1-624 .level1}

*^1^ My oneness with the Christ establishes me as Your Son, beyond the
reach of time and wholly free of every law but Yours. I have no self
except the Christ in me. I have no purpose but His own. And He is like
His Father. Thus must I be one with You as well as Him. For who is
Christ except Your Son as You created Him? And what am I except the
Christ in me?*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 355 There is no end to all the peace and joy and all the miracles that I will give when I accept God's Word. Why not today?**](#part0004.html#level-625) {#part0060_split_005.html#h1-625 .level1}

*^1^ Why should I wait, my Father, for the joy You promised me? For You
will keep Your Word You gave Your Son in exile. I am sure my treasure
waits for me, and I need but reach out my hand to find it. Even now my
fingers touch it. It is very close. I need not wait an instant more to
be at peace forever. It is You I choose and my identity along with You.
Your Son would be Himself and know You as his Father and Creator and his
Love.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 356 Sickness is but another name for sin. Healing is but another Name for God. The miracle is thus a call to Him**](#part0004.html#level-626) {#part0060_split_006.html#h1-626 .level1}

*^1^ Father, You promised You would never fail to answer any call Your
Son might make to You. It does not matter where he is, what seems to be
his problem, nor what he believes he has become. He is Your Son, and You
will answer him. The miracle reflects Your Love, and thus it answers
him. Your Name replaces every thought of sin, and who is sinless cannot
suffer pain. Your Name gives answer to Your Son because to call Your
Name is but to call his own.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 357 Truth answers every call we make to God, responding first with miracles, and then returning unto us to be itself**](#part0004.html#level-627) {#part0060_split_007.html#h1-627 .level1}

*^1^ Forgiveness, truth's reflection, tells me how to offer miracles and
thus escape the prison house in which I think I live. Your holy Son is
pointed out to me, first in my brother, then in me. Your Voice instructs
me patiently to hear Your Word and give as I receive. And as I look upon
Your Son today, I hear Your Voice instructing me to find the way to You
as You appointed that the way shall be: "Behold his sinlessness, and be
you healed."*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 358 No call to God can be unheard nor left unanswered. And of this I can be sure--- His answer is the one I really want**](#part0004.html#level-628) {#part0060_split_008.html#h1-628 .level1}

*^1^ You Who remember what I really am alone remember what I really
want. You speak for God, and so You speak for me. And what You give me
comes from God Himself. Your Voice, my Father, then is mine as well, and
all I want is what You offer me, in just the form You chose that it be
mine. Let me remember all I do not know, and let my voice be still,
remembering. But let me not forget Your Love and care, keeping Your
promise to Your Son in my awareness always. Let me not forget myself is
nothing, but my Self is all.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 359 God's answer is some form of peace. All pain is healed; all misery replaced with joy. All prison doors are opened. And all sin is understood as merely a mistake**](#part0004.html#level-629) {#part0060_split_009.html#h1-629 .level1}

*^1^ Father, today we will forgive Your world and let creation be Your
own. We have misunderstood all things. But we have not made sinners of
the holy Sons of God. What You created sinless so abides forever and
forever. Such are we. And we rejoice to learn that we have made mistakes
which have no real effects on us. Sin is impossible, and on this fact
forgiveness rests upon a certain base more solid than the shadow world
we see. Help us forgive, for we would be redeemed. Help us forgive, for
we would be at peace.*
:::

[]{#part0060_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 360 Peace be to me, the holy Son of God. Peace to my brother, who is one with me. Let all the world be blessed with peace through us**](#part0004.html#level-630) {#part0060_split_010.html#h1-630 .level1}

*^1^ Father, it is Your peace that I would give, receiving it of You. I
am Your Son, forever just as You created me, for the Great Rays remain
forever still and undisturbed within me. I would reach to them in
silence and in certainty, for nowhere else can certainty be found. Peace
be to me and peace to all the world. In holiness were we created, and in
holiness do we remain. Your Son is like to You in perfect sinlessness,
and with this thought we gladly say "Amen."*
:::

[]{#part0061_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**O[UR]{.small} F[INAL]{.small} L[ESSONS]{.small}**](#part0004.html#chap-46) {#part0061_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^IF:1^Our final lessons will be left as free of words as possible. We
use them but at the beginning of our practicing and only to remind us
that we seek to go beyond them. Let us turn to Him Who leads the way and
makes our footsteps sure. To Him we leave these lessons, as to Him we
give our lives henceforth. For we would not return again to the belief
in sin, which made the world seem ugly and unsafe, attacking and
destroying, dangerous in all its ways, and treacherous beyond the hope
of trust and the escape from pain.

^2^ His is the only way to find the peace that God has given us. It is
His way that everyone must travel in the end, because it is this ending
God Himself appointed. In the dream of time, it seems to be far off. And
yet in truth, it is already here, already serving us as gracious
guidance in the way to go. Let us together follow in this way that truth
points out to us. And let us be the leaders of our many brothers who are
seeking for the way but find it not.

^3^ And to this purpose let us dedicate our minds, directing all our
thoughts to serve the function of salvation. Unto us the aim is given to
forgive the world. It is the goal that God has given us. It is His
ending to the dream we seek, and not our own. For all that we forgive we
will not fail to recognize as part of God Himself. And thus His memory
is given back completely and complete.

^4^ It is our function to remember Him on earth, as it is given us to be
His own completion in reality. So let us not forget our goal is shared.
For it is that remembrance which contains the memory of God and points
the way to Him and to the Heaven of His peace. And shall we not forgive
our brother who can offer this to us? He is the way, the truth, and life
that show the way to us. In him resides salvation, offered us through
our forgiveness given unto him.

^5^ We will not end this year without the gift our Father promised to
His holy Son. We are forgiven now. And we are saved from all the wrath
we thought belonged to God and found it was a dream. We are restored to
sanity in which we understand that anger is insane, attack is mad, and
vengeance merely foolish fantasy. We have been saved from wrath because
we learned we were mistaken. Nothing more than that. And is a Father
angry at His Son because he failed to understand the truth?

^6^ We come in honesty to Him and say we did not understand and ask Him
to help us to learn His lessons through the Voice of His own Teacher.
Would He hurt His Son? Or would He rush to answer him and say, "This is
My Son, and all I have is his"? Be certain He will answer thus, for
these are His own Words to you. And more than that can no one ever have,
for in these Words is all there is and all that there will be throughout
all time and in eternity.
:::

[]{#part0061_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Lesson 361-365 This holy instant would I give to You. Be You in charge. For I would follow You, certain that Your direction gives me peace**](#part0004.html#level-631) {#part0061_split_001.html#h1-631 .level1}

*^1^ If I need a word to help me, He will give it to me. If I need a
thought, that will He also give. And if I need but stillness and a
tranquil, open mind, these are the gifts I will receive of Him. He is in
charge by my request. And He will hear and answer me because He speaks
for God, my Father, and His holy Son.*
:::

[]{#part0062.html}

::: {.body}
# [**E[PILOGUE]{.small}**](#part0004.html#epi-1) {#part0062.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ This course is a beginning, not an end. Your Friend goes with you.
You are not alone. No one who calls on Him can call in vain. Whatever
troubles you, be certain that He has the answer and will gladly give it
to you if you simply turn to Him and ask it of Him. He will not withhold
all answers that you need for anything that seems to trouble you. He
knows the way to solve all problems and resolve all doubts. His
certainty is yours. You need but ask it of Him, and it will be given
you.

^2^ You are as certain of arriving home as is the pathway of the sun
laid down before it rises, after it has set, and in the half-lit hours
in between. Indeed, your pathway is more certain still, for it can not
be possible to change the course of those whom God has called to Him.
Therefore, obey your will and follow Him Whom you accepted as your
Voice, to speak of what you really want and really need. His is the
Voice for God, and also yours. And thus He speaks of freedom and of
truth.

^3^ No more specific lessons are assigned, for there is no more need of
them. Henceforth, hear but the Voice for God and for your Self when you
retire from the world, to seek Reality instead. He will direct your
efforts, telling you exactly what to do, how to direct your mind, and
when to come to Him in silence, asking for His sure direction and His
certain Word. His is the Word that God has given you. His is the Word
you chose to be your own.

^4^ And now I place you in His hands, to be His faithful followers, with
Him as Guide through every difficulty and all pain that you may think is
real. Nor will He give you pleasures that will pass away, for He gives
only the eternal and the good. Let Him prepare you further. He has
earned your trust by speaking daily to you of your Father and your
brother and your Self. He will continue; now you walk with Him as
certain as is He of where you go; as sure as He of how you should
proceed, as confident as He is of the goal and of your safe arrival in
the end.

^5^ The end is certain and the means as well. To this we say "Amen." We
will be told exactly what God wills for us each time there is a choice
to make. And He will speak for God and for your Self, thus making sure
that hell will claim you not and that each choice you make brings Heaven
nearer to your reach. And so we walk with Him from this time on and turn
to Him for guidance and for peace and right direction. Joy attends our
way. For we go homeward to an open door which God has held unclosed to
welcome us.

^6^ We trust our ways to Him and say "Amen." In peace we will continue
in His way and trust all things to Him. In confidence we wait His
answers, as we ask His will in everything we do. He loves God's Son as
we would love him, and He teaches us how to behold him through His eyes
and love him as He does. You do not walk alone. God's angels hover close
and all about. His Love surrounds you, and of this be sure: that I will
never leave you comfortless.
:::

[]{#part0063.html}

::: {.body}
# [**Manual For Teachers**](#part0004.html#section-2) {#part0063.html#calibre_pb_0 .chapter-number}
:::

[]{#part0064.html}

::: {.body}
# **Manual For Teachers** {#part0064.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The role of teaching and learning is actually reversed in the
thinking of the world. The reversal is characteristic. It seems as if
the teacher and the learner are separated, the teacher giving something
to the learner rather than to himself. Further, the act of teaching is
regarded as a special activity in which one engages only a relatively
small proportion of one's time. The course, on the other hand,
emphasizes that to teach is to learn, so that teacher and learner are
the same. It also emphasizes that teaching is a constant process---it
goes on every moment of the day and continues into sleeping thoughts as
well.

^2^ To teach is to demonstrate. There are only two thought systems, and
you demonstrate that you believe one or the other is true all the time.
From your demonstration, others learn and so do you. The question is not
whether you will teach, for in that there is no choice. The purpose of
the course might be said to provide you with a means of choosing what
you want to teach on the basis of what you want to learn. You cannot
give to someone else, and this you learn through teaching. Teaching is
but a call to witnesses to attest to what you believe. It is a method of
conversion. This is not done by words alone. Any situation must be to
you a chance to teach others what you are and what they are to you. No
more than that, but also never less.

^3^ The curriculum that you set up is therefore determined exclusively
by what you think you are and what you believe the relationship of
others is to you. In the formal teaching situation, these questions may
be totally unrelated to what you think you are teaching. Yet it is
impossible not to use the content of any situation on behalf of what you
really teach and therefore learn. To this the verbal content of your
teaching is quite irrelevant. It may coincide with it or it may not. It
is the teaching underlying what you say that teaches you. Teaching but
reinforces what you believe about yourself. Its fundamental purpose is
to diminish self doubt. This does not mean that the self you are trying
to protect is real. But it does mean that the self you think is real is
what you teach.

^4^ This is inevitable. There is no escape from it. How could it be
otherwise? Everyone who follows the world's curriculum, and everyone
here does follow it until he changes his mind, teaches solely to
convince himself that he is what he is not. Herein is the purpose of the
world. What else, then, would its curriculum be? Into this hopeless and
closed learning situation which teaches nothing but despair and death,
God sends His teachers. And as they teach His lessons of joy and hope,
their learning finally becomes complete.

^5^ Except for God's teachers, there would be no hope of salvation, for
the world of sin would seem forever "real." The self-deceiving must
deceive, for they must teach deception. And what else is hell? This is a
manual for the teachers of God. They are not perfect or they would not
be here. Yet it is their mission to become perfect here, and so they
teach perfection over and over in many, many ways until they have
learned it. And then they are seen no more, although their thoughts
remain a source of strength and truth forever. Who are they? How are
they chosen? What do they do? How can they work out their own salvation
and the salvation of the world? This manual attempts to answer these
questions.
:::

[]{#part0065.html}

::: {.body}
# [**1. Who Are God's Teachers?**](#part0004.html#chap-47) {#part0065.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ A teacher of God is anyone who chooses to be one. His qualifications
consist solely in this; somehow, somewhere he has made a deliberate
choice in which he did not see his interests as apart from someone
else's. Once he has done that, his road is established and his direction
is sure. A light has entered the darkness. It may be a single light, but
that is enough. He has entered an agreement with God even if he does not
yet believe in Him. He has become a bringer of salvation. He has become
a teacher of God.

^2^ They come from all over the world. They come from all religions and
from no religion. They are the ones who have answered. The Call is
universal. It goes on all the time everywhere. It calls for teachers to
speak for it and redeem the world. Many hear it, but few will answer.
But it is all a matter of time. Everyone will answer in the end, but the
end can be a long, long way off. It is because of this that the plan of
the teachers was established. Their function is to save time. Each one
begins as a single light, but with the Call at its center, it is a light
that cannot be limited. And each one saves a thousand years of time as
the world judges it. To the Call itself, time has no meaning.

^3^ There is a course for every teacher of God. The form of the course
varies greatly. So do the particular teaching aids involved. But the
content of the course never changes. Its central theme is always, "God's
Son is guiltless, and in his innocence is his salvation." It can be
taught by actions or thoughts, in words or soundlessly, in any language
or in no language, in any place or time or manner. It does not matter
who the teacher was before he heard the Call. He has become a savior by
his answering. He has seen someone else as himself. He has therefore
found his own salvation and the salvation of the world. In his rebirth
is the world reborn.

^4^ This is a manual for a special curriculum, intended for teachers of
a special form of the universal course. There are many thousands of
other forms, all with the same outcome. They merely save time. Yet it is
time alone that winds on wearily, and the world is very tired now. It is
old and worn and without hope. There was never a question of outcome,
for what can change the Will of God? But time, with its illusions of
change and death, wears out the world and all things in it. Yet time has
an ending, and it is this that the teachers of God are appointed to
bring about. For time is in their hands. Such was their choice, and it
is given them.
:::

[]{#part0066.html}

::: {.body}
# [**2. Who Are Their Pupils?**](#part0004.html#chap-48) {#part0066.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Certain pupils have been assigned to each of God's teachers, and
they will begin to look for him as soon as he has answered the Call.
They were chosen for him because the form of the universal curriculum
that he will teach is best for them in view of their level of
understanding. His pupils have been waiting for him, for his coming is
certain. Again, it is only a matter of time. Once he has chosen to
fulfill his role, they are ready to fulfill theirs. Time waits on his
choice but not whom he will serve. When he is ready to learn, the
opportunities to teach will be provided for him.

^2^ In order to understand the teaching-learning plan of salvation, it
is necessary to grasp the concept of time which the course sets forth.
Atonement corrects illusions, not the truth. Therefore it corrects what
never was. Further, the plan for this correction was established and
completed simultaneously, for the Will of God is entirely apart from
time. So is all reality, being of Him. The instant the idea of
separation entered the mind of God's Son, in that same instant was God's
Answer given. In time this happened very long ago. In reality it never
happened at all.

^3^ The world of time is the world of illusion. What happened long ago
seems to be happening now. Choices made long since appear to be open,
yet to be made. What has been learned and understood and long ago passed
by is looked upon as a new thought, a fresh idea, a different approach.
Because your will is free, you can accept what has already happened at
any time you choose, and only then will you realize that it was always
there. As the course emphasizes, you are not free to choose the
curriculum or even the form in which you will learn it. You are free,
however, to decide when you want to learn it. And as you accept it, it
is already learned.

^4^ Time really, then, goes backward to an instant so ancient that it is
beyond all memory and past even the possibility of remembering. Yet
because it is an instant that is relived again and again and still
again, it seems to be now. And thus it is that pupil and teacher seem to
come together in the present, finding each other as if they had not met
before. The pupil comes at the right time to the right place. This is
inevitable because he made the right choice in that ancient instant
which he now relives. So has the teacher, too, made an inevitable choice
out of an ancient past. God's Will in everything but seems to take time
in the working-out. What could delay the Power of eternity?

^5^ When pupil and teacher come together, a teaching-learning situation
begins. For the teacher is not really the one who does the teaching.
God's Teacher speaks to any two who join together for learning purposes.
The relationship is holy because of that purpose, and God has promised
to send His Spirit into any holy relationship. In the teaching-learning
situation, each one learns that giving and receiving are the same. The
demarcations they have drawn between their roles, their minds, their
bodies, their needs, their interests, and all the differences they
thought separated them from one another fade and grow dim and disappear.
Those who would learn the same course share one interest and one goal.
And thus he who was the learner becomes a teacher of God Himself, for he
has made the one decision that gave his teacher to him. He has seen in
another person the same interests as his own.
:::

[]{#part0067.html}

::: {.body}
# [**3. What are the Levels of Teaching?**](#part0004.html#chap-49) {#part0067.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The teachers of God have no set teaching level. Each
teaching-learning situation involves a different relationship at the
beginning, although the ultimate goal is always the same---to make of
the relationship a holy relationship in which both can look upon the Son
of God as sinless. There is no one from whom a teacher of God cannot
learn, so there is no one whom he cannot teach. However, from a
practical point of view, he cannot meet everyone, nor can everyone find
him. Therefore, the plan includes very specific contacts to be made for
each teacher of God. There are no accidents in salvation. Those who are
to meet will meet because together they have the potential for a holy
relationship. They are ready for each other.

^2^ The simplest level of teaching appears to be quite superficial. It
consists of what seem to be very casual encounters---a chance meeting of
two apparent strangers in an elevator, a child who is not looking where
he is going running into an adult "by accident," two students who happen
to walk home together. These are not chance encounters. Each of them has
the potential for becoming a teaching-learning situation. Perhaps the
seeming strangers in the elevator will smile to one another; perhaps the
man will not scold the child for bumping into him; perhaps the students
will become friends. Even at the level of the most casual encounter, it
is possible for two people to lose sight of separate interests, if only
for a moment. That moment will be enough. Salvation has come.

^3^ It is difficult to understand that levels of teaching the universal
course is a concept as meaningless in reality as is time. The illusion
of one permits the illusion of the other. In time, the teacher of God
seems to begin to change his mind about the world with the single
decision, and then learns more and more about the new direction as he
teaches it. We have covered the illusion of time already, but the
illusion of levels of teaching seems to be something different. Perhaps
the best way to demonstrate that these levels cannot exist is simply to
say that any level of the teaching-learning situation is part of God's
plan for Atonement, and His plan can have no levels, being a reflection
of His Will. Salvation is always ready and always there. God's teachers
work at different levels, but the result is always the same.

^4^ Each teaching-learning situation is maximal in the sense that each
person involved will learn the most that he can from the other person at
that time. In this sense, and in this sense only, we can speak of levels
of teaching. Using the term in this way, the second level of teaching is
a more sustained relationship in which for a time two people enter into
a fairly intense teaching-learning situation and then appear to
separate. As with the first level, these meetings are not accidental,
nor is what appears to be the end of the relationship a real end. Again,
each has learned the most he can at the time. Yet all who meet will
someday meet again, for it is the destiny of all relationships to become
holy. God is not mistaken in His Son.

^5^ The third level of teaching occurs in relationships which, once they
are formed, are lifelong. These are teaching-learning situations in
which each person is given a chosen learning partner who presents him
with unlimited opportunities for learning. These relationships are
generally few because their existence implies that those involved have
reached a stage simultaneously in which the teaching-learning balance is
actually perfect. This does not mean that they necessarily recognize
this; in fact, they generally do not. They may even be quite hostile to
each other for some time, and perhaps for life. Yet should they decide
to learn it, the perfect lesson is before them and can be learned. And
if they decide to learn that lesson, they become the saviors of the
teachers who falter and may even seem to fail. No teacher of God can
fail to find the Help he needs.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**4. What Are the Characteristics of God's Teachers?**](#part0004.html#chap-50) {#part0068_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The surface traits of God's teachers are not at all alike. They do
not look alike to the body's eyes, they come from vastly different
backgrounds, their experiences of the world vary greatly, and their
superficial "personalities" are quite distinct. Nor at the beginning
stages of their functioning as teachers of God have they as yet acquired
the deeper characteristics that will establish them as what they are.
God gives special gifts to His teachers because they have a special role
in His plan for Atonement. Their specialness is, of course, only
temporary---set in time as a means of leading out of time. These special
gifts, born in the holy relationship toward which the teaching-learning
situation is geared, become characteristic of all teachers of God who
have advanced in their own learning. In this respect they are all alike.

^2^ All differences among the Sons of God are temporary. Nevertheless,
in time it can be said that the advanced teachers of God have the
following characteristics:
:::

[]{#part0068_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
## **Trust** {#part0068_split_001.html#calibre_pb_1 .calibre6}

^3^ This is the foundation on which their ability to fulfill their
function rests. Perception is the result of learning. In fact,
perception is learning because cause and effect are never separated. The
teachers of God have trust in the world because they have learned it is
not governed by the laws the world made up. It is governed by a Power
Which is in them but not of them. It is this Power that keeps all things
safe. It is through this Power that the teachers of God look on a
forgiven world.

^4^ When this Power has once been experienced, it is impossible to trust
one's own petty strength again. Who would attempt to fly with the tiny
wings of a sparrow when the mighty power of an eagle has been given him?
And who would place his faith in the shabby offerings of the ego when
the gifts of God are laid before him? What is it that induces them to
make the shift?

^5^ First, they must go through what might be called "a period of
undoing." This need not be painful, but it usually is so experienced. It
seems as if things are being taken away, and it is rarely understood
initially that their lack of value is merely being recognized. How can
lack of value be perceived unless the perceiver is in a position where
he must see things in a different light? He is not yet at a point at
which he can make the shift entirely internally. And so the plan will
sometimes call for changes in what seem to be external circumstances.
These changes are always helpful. When the teacher of God has learned
that much, he goes on to the second stage.

^6^ Next, the teacher of God must go through a "period of sorting-out."
This is always somewhat difficult because, having learned that the
changes in his life are always helpful, he must now decide all things on
the basis of whether they increase the helpfulness or hamper it. He will
find that many if not most of the things he valued before will merely
hinder his ability to transfer what he has learned to new situations as
they arise. Because he has valued what is really valueless, he will not
generalize the lesson for fear of loss and sacrifice. It takes great
learning to understand that all things, events, encounters, and
circumstances are helpful. It is only to the extent to which they are
helpful that any degree of reality should be accorded them in this world
of illusion. The word "value" can apply to nothing else.

^7^ The third stage through which the teachers of God must go can be
called a "period of relinquishment." If this is interpreted as giving up
the desirable, it will engender enormous conflict. Few teachers of God
escape this distress entirely. There is, however, no point in sorting
out the valuable from the valueless unless the next obvious step is
taken. The third step is rarely if ever begun until the second is
complete. Therefore, the period of overlap is apt to be one in which the
teacher of God feels called upon to sacrifice his own best interests on
behalf of truth. He has not realized as yet how wholly impossible such a
demand would be. He can learn this only as he actually does give up the
valueless. Through this he learns that where he anticipated grief, he
finds a happy light-heartedness instead; where he thought something was
asked of him, he finds a gift bestowed on him.

^8^ Now comes a "period of settling down." This is a quiet time in which
the teacher of God rests a while in reasonable peace. Now he
consolidates his learning. Now he begins to see the transfer value of
what he has learned. Its potential is literally staggering, and the
teacher of God is now at the point in his progress at which he sees in
it his whole way out. "Give up what you do not want and keep what you
do." How simple is the obvious! And how easy to do! The teacher of God
needs this period of respite. He has not yet come as far as he thinks.
Yet when he is ready to go on, he goes with mighty companions beside
him. Now he rests a while and gathers them before going on. He will not
go on from here alone.

^9^ The next stage is indeed a "period of unsettling." Now must the
teacher of God understand that he did not really know what was valuable
and what was valueless. All that he really learned so far was that he
did not want the valueless and that he did want the valuable. Yet his
own sorting-out was meaningless in teaching him the difference. The idea
of sacrifice, so central to his thought system, had made it impossible
for him to judge. He thought he had learned willingness, but now he sees
that he does not know what the willingness is for. And now he must
attain a state that may remain impossible for a long, long time. He must
learn to lay all judgment aside and ask only what he really wants in
every circumstance. Were not each step in this direction so heavily
reinforced, it would be hard indeed!

^10^ And finally, there is a "period of achievement." It is here that
learning is consolidated. Now what was seen as merely shadows before
becomes solid gains, to be counted on in all "emergencies" as well as
tranquil times. Indeed, the tranquillity is their result---the outcome
of honest learning, consistency of thought, and full transfer. This is
the stage of real peace, for here is Heaven's state fully reflected.
From here the way to Heaven is open and easy. In fact, it is here. Who
would "go" anywhere if peace of mind is already complete? And who would
seek to change tranquillity for something more desirable? What could be
more desirable than this?
:::

[]{#part0068_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
## **Honesty** {#part0068_split_002.html#calibre_pb_2 .calibre6}

^11^ All other traits of God's teachers rest on trust. Once that has
been achieved, the others cannot fail to follow. Only the trusting can
afford honesty, for only they can see its value. Honesty does not apply
only to what you say. The term actually means consistency. There is
nothing you say that contradicts what you think or do; no thought
opposes any other thought; no act belies your word; and no word lacks
agreement with another. Such are the truly honest. At no level are they
in conflict with themselves. Therefore it is impossible for them to be
in conflict with anyone or anything.

^12^ The peace of mind which the advanced teachers of God experience is
largely due to their perfect honesty. It is only the wish to deceive
that makes for war. No one at one with himself can even conceive of
conflict. Conflict is the inevitable result of self-deception, and
self-deception is dishonesty. There is no challenge to a teacher of God.
Challenge implies doubt, and the trust on which God's teachers rest
secure makes doubt impossible. Therefore they can only succeed. In this,
as in all things, they are honest. They can only succeed because they
never do their will alone. They choose for all mankind, for all the
world and all things in it, for the unchanging and unchangeable beyond
appearances, and for the Son of God and his Creator. How could they not
succeed? They choose in perfect honesty, sure of their choice
themselves.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
## **Tolerance** {#part0068_split_003.html#calibre_pb_3 .calibre6}

^13^ God's teachers do not judge. To judge is to be dishonest, for to
judge is to assume a position you do not have. Judgment without
self-deception is impossible. Judgment implies that you have been
deceived in your brothers. How then could you not have been deceived in
yourself? Judgment implies a lack of trust, and trust remains the
bed-rock of the teacher of God's whole thought system. Let this be lost,
and all his learning goes. Without judgment are all things equally
acceptable, for who could judge otherwise? Without judgment are all men
brothers, for who is there who stands apart? Judgment destroys honesty
and shatters trust. No teacher of God can judge and hope to learn.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_004.html}

::: {.body}
## **Gentleness** {#part0068_split_004.html#calibre_pb_4 .calibre6}

^14^ Harm is impossible for God's teachers. They can neither harm nor be
harmed. Harm is the outcome of judgment. It is the dishonest act that
follows a dishonest thought. It is a verdict of guilt upon a brother and
therefore on one's self. It is the end of peace and the denial of
learning. It demonstrates the absence of God's curriculum and its
replacement by insanity. No teacher of God but must learn---and fairly
early in his training---that harmfulness completely obliterates his
function from his awareness. It will make him confused, fearful, angry,
and suspicious. It will make the Holy Spirit's lessons impossible to
learn. Nor can God's Teacher be heard at all except by those who realize
that harm can actually achieve nothing. No gain can come of it.

^15^ Therefore God's teachers are wholly gentle. They need the strength
of gentleness, for it is in this that the function of salvation becomes
easy. To those who would do harm, it is impossible. To those to whom
harm has no meaning, it is merely natural. What choice but this has
meaning to the sane? Who chooses hell when he perceives a way to Heaven?
And who would choose the weakness that must come from harm in place of
the unfailing, all-encompassing, and limitless strength of gentleness?
The might of God's teachers lies in their gentleness, for they have
understood their evil thoughts came neither from God's Son nor his
Creator. Thus did they join their thoughts with Him Who is their Source.
And so their will, which always was His own, is free to be itself.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_005.html}

::: {.body}
## **Joy** {#part0068_split_005.html#calibre_pb_5 .calibre6}

^16^ Joy is the inevitable result of gentleness. Gentleness means that
fear is now impossible, and what could come to interfere with joy? The
open hands of gentleness are always filled. The gentle have no pain.
They cannot suffer. Why would they not be joyous? They are sure they are
beloved and must be safe. Joy goes with gentleness as surely as grief
attends attack. God's teachers trust in Him. And they are sure His
Teacher goes before them, making sure no harm can come to them. They
hold His gifts and follow in His way because God's Voice directs them in
all things. Joy is their song of thanks. And Christ looks down on them
in thanks as well. His need of them is just as great as theirs of Him.
How joyous it is to share the purpose of salvation!
:::

[]{#part0068_split_006.html}

::: {.body}
## **Defenselessness** {#part0068_split_006.html#calibre_pb_6 .calibre6}

^17^ God's teachers have learned how to be simple. They have no dreams
that need defense against the truth. They do not try to make themselves.
Their joy comes from their understanding Who created them. And does what
God created need defense? No one can become an advanced teacher of God
until he fully understands that defenses are but the foolish guardians
of mad illusions. The more grotesque the dream, the fiercer and more
powerful its defenses seem to be. Yet when the teacher of God finally
agrees to look past them, he finds nothing was there. Slowly at first,
he lets himself be undeceived. But he learns faster as his trust
increases. It is not danger that comes when defenses are laid down. It
is safety. It is peace. It is joy. And it is God.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_007.html}

::: {.body}
## **Generosity** {#part0068_split_007.html#calibre_pb_7 .calibre6}

^18^ The term generosity has special meaning to the teacher of God. It
is not the usual meaning of the word; in fact, it is a meaning that must
be learned and learned very carefully. Like all the other attributes of
God's teachers, this one rests ultimately on trust, for without trust,
no one can be generous in the true sense. To the world, generosity means
"giving away" in the sense of "giving up." To the teachers of God, it
means "giving away" in order to keep. This has been emphasized
throughout the text and the workbook, but it is perhaps more alien to
the thinking of the world than many other ideas in our curriculum. Its
greater strangeness lies merely in the obviousness of its reversal of
the world's thinking. In the clearest way possible and at the simplest
of levels, the word means the exact opposite to the teachers of God and
to the world.

^19^ The teacher of God is generous out of self-interest. This does not
refer, however, to the self the world speaks of. The teacher of God does
not want anything he cannot give away because he realizes it would be
valueless to him by definition. What would he want it for? He could only
lose because of it. He could not gain. Therefore he does not seek what
only he could keep because that is a guarantee of loss. He does not want
to suffer. Why should he ensure himself pain? But he does want to keep
for himself all things that are of God and therefore for His Son. These
are the things that belong to him. These he can give away in true
generosity, protecting them forever for himself.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_008.html}

::: {.body}
## **Patience** {#part0068_split_008.html#calibre_pb_8 .calibre6}

^20^ Those who are certain of the outcome can afford to wait, and wait
without anxiety. Patience is natural to the teacher of God. All he sees
is certain outcome, at a time perhaps unknown as yet but not in doubt.
The time will be as right as is the answer. And this is true for
everything that happens now or in the future. The past as well held no
mistakes---nothing that did not serve to benefit the world as well as
him to whom it seemed to happen. Perhaps it was not understood at the
time. Even so, the teacher of God is willing to reconsider all his past
decisions if they are causing pain to anyone. Patience is natural to
those who trust. Sure of the ultimate interpretation of all things in
time, no outcome already seen or yet to come can cause them fear.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_009.html}

::: {.body}
## **Faithfulness** {#part0068_split_009.html#calibre_pb_9 .calibre6}

^21^The extent of the teacher of God's faithfulness is the measure of
his advancement in the curriculum. Does he still select some aspects of
his life to bring to his learning while keeping others apart? If so, his
advancement is limited and his trust not yet firmly established.
Faithfulness is the teacher of God's trust in the Word of God to set all
things right---not some but all. Generally, his faithfulness begins by
resting on just some problems, remaining carefully limited for a time.
To give up all problems to one Answer is to reverse the thinking of the
world entirely. And that alone is faithfulness. Nothing but that really
deserves the name. Yet each degree, however small, is worth achieving.
Readiness, as the text notes, is not mastery.

^22^True faithfulness, however, does not deviate. Being consistent, it
is wholly honest. Being unswerving, it is full of trust. Being based on
fearlessness, it is gentle. Being certain it is joyous, and being
confident, it is tolerant. Defenselessness attends it naturally, and joy
is its condition. Faithfulness, then, combines in itself the other
attributes of God's teachers. It implies acceptance of the Word of God
and His definition of His Son. It is to them that faithfulness in the
true sense is always directed. Toward them it looks, seeking until it
finds. And having found, it rests in quiet certainty on that alone to
which all faithfulness is due.
:::

[]{#part0068_split_010.html}

::: {.body}
## **Open Mindedness** {#part0068_split_010.html#calibre_pb_10 .calibre6}

^23^ The centrality of openmindedness, perhaps the last of the
attributes the teacher of God acquires, is easily understood when its
relation to forgiveness is recognized. Openmindedness comes with lack of
judgment. As judgment shuts the mind against God's Teacher, so
openmindedness invites Him to come in. As condemnation judges the Son of
God as evil, so openmindedness permits him to be judged by the Voice for
God on His behalf. As the projection of guilt upon him would send him to
hell, so openmindedness lets Christ's image be projected on him. Only
the openminded can be at peace, for they alone see reason for it.

^24^ How do the openminded forgive? They have let go all things that
would prevent forgiveness. They have in truth abandoned the world and
let it be restored to them in newness and in joy so glorious they could
never have conceived of such a change. Nothing is now as it was
formerly. Nothing but sparkles now which seemed so dull and lifeless
before. And above all are all things welcoming, for threat is gone. No
clouds remain to hide the face of Christ. Now is the goal achieved.
Forgiveness is the final goal of the curriculum. It paves the way for
what goes far beyond all learning. The curriculum makes no effort to
exceed its legitimate goal. Forgiveness is its single aim at which all
learning ultimately converges. It is indeed enough.

^25^ You may have noticed that the list of attributes of God's teachers
does not include those things which are the Son of God's inheritance.
Terms like love, sinlessness, perfection, knowledge and eternal truth do
not appear in this context. They would be most inappropriate here. What
God has given is so far beyond our curriculum that learning but
disappears in its presence. Yet while its presence is obscured, the
focus properly belongs on the curriculum. It is the function of God's
teachers to bring true learning to the world. Properly speaking it is
unlearning that they bring, for that is "true learning" in the world. It
is given to the teachers of God to bring the glad tidings of complete
forgiveness to the world. Blessed indeed are they, for they are the
bringers of salvation.
:::

[]{#part0069_split_000.html}

::: {.body}
# [**5. How is Healing Accomplished?**](#part0004.html#chap-51) {#part0069_split_000.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Healing involves an understanding of what the illusion of sickness
is for. Healing is impossible without this
:::

[]{#part0069_split_001.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Perceived Purpose of Sickness** {#part0069_split_001.html#calibre_pb_1 .calibre6}

^2^ Healing is accomplished the instant the sufferer no longer sees any
value in pain. Who would choose suffering unless he thought it brought
him something, and something of value to him? He must think it is a
small price to pay for something of greater worth. For sickness is an
election, a decision. It is the choice of weakness in the mistaken
conviction that it is strength. When this occurs, real strength is seen
as threat and health as danger. Sickness is a method, conceived in
madness, for placing God's Son on his Father's throne. God is seen as
outside, fierce and powerful, eager to keep all power for Himself. Only
by His death can He be conquered by His Son.

^3^ And what, in this insane conviction, does healing stand for? It
symbolizes the defeat of God's Son and the triumph of his Father over
him. It represents the ultimate defiance in a direct form which the Son
of God is forced to recognize. It stands for all that he would hide from
himself to protect his life. If he is healed, he is responsible for his
thoughts. And if he is responsible for his thoughts, he will be killed
to prove to him how weak and pitiful he is. But if he chooses death
himself, his weakness is his strength. Now has he given himself what God
would give to him and thus entirely usurped the throne of his Creator.
:::

[]{#part0069_split_002.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Shift in Perception** {#part0069_split_002.html#calibre_pb_2 .calibre6}

^4^ Healing must occur in exact proportion in which the valuelessness of
sickness is recognized. One need but say, "There is no gain to me at all
in this," and he is healed. But to say this one must first recognize
certain facts. First, it is obvious that decisions are of the mind, not
of the body. If sickness is but a faulty problem-solving approach, it is
a decision. And if it is a decision, it is the mind and not the body
that makes it. The resistance to recognizing this is enormous because
the existence of the world as we perceive it depends on the body being
the decision-maker. Terms like "instincts," "reflexes" and the like
represent attempts to endow the body with non-mental motivators.
Actually, such terms merely state or describe the problem. They do not
answer it.

^5^ The acceptance of sickness as a decision of the mind for a purpose
for which it would use the body is the basis of healing. And this is so
for healing in all forms. A patient decides that this is so, and he
recovers. If he decides against recovery, he will not be healed. Who is
the physician? Only the mind of the patient himself. The outcome is what
he decides that it is. Special agents seem to be ministering to him, yet
they but give form to his own choice. He chooses them to bring tangible
form to his desires. And it is this they do, and nothing else. They are
not actually needed at all. The patient could merely rise up without
their aid and say, "I have no use for this." There is no form of
sickness that would not be cured at once.

^6^ What is the single requisite for this shift in perception? It is
simply this: the recognition that sickness is of the mind and has
nothing to do with the body. What does this recognition "cost"? It costs
the whole world we see, for the world will never again appear to rule
the mind. For with this recognition is responsibility placed where it
belongs---not with the world but on him who looks on the world and sees
it as it is not. He looks on what he chooses to see. No more and no
less. The world does nothing to him. He only thought it did. Nor does he
do anything to the world because he was mistaken about what it was.
Herein is the release from guilt and sickness both, for they are one.
Yet to accept this release, the insignificance of the body must be an
acceptable idea.

^7^ With this idea is pain forever gone. But with this idea goes also
all confusion about creation. Does not this follow of necessity? Place
cause and effect in their true sequence in one respect, and the learning
will generalize and transform the world. The transfer value of one true
idea has no end nor limit. The final outcome of this lesson is the
remembrance of God. What do guilt and sickness, pain, disaster, and all
suffering mean now? Having no purpose, they are gone. And with them also
go all the effects they seemed to cause. Cause and effect but replicate
creation. Seen in their proper perspective, without distortion and
without fear, they re-establish Heaven.
:::

[]{#part0069_split_003.html}

::: {.body}
## **The Function of the Teacher of God** {#part0069_split_003.html#calibre_pb_3 .calibre6}

^8^ If the patient must change his mind in order to be healed, what does
the teacher of God do? Can he change the patient's mind for him?
Certainly not. For those already willing to change their mind he has no
function except to rejoice with them, for they have become teachers of
God with him. He has, however, a more specific function for those who do
not understand what healing is. These patients do not realize they have
chosen sickness. On the contrary, they believe that sickness has chosen
them. Nor are they open-minded on this point. The body tells them what
to do, and they obey. They have no idea how insane this concept is. If
they even suspected it, they would be healed. Yet they suspect nothing.
To them the separation is quite real.

^9^ To them God's teachers come to represent another choice which they
had forgotten. The simple presence of a teacher of God is a reminder.
His thoughts ask for the right to question what the patient has accepted
is true. As God's messengers, His teachers are the symbols of salvation.
They ask the patient for forgiveness for God's Son in his own name. They
stand for the alternative. With God's Word in their minds they come in
benediction, not to heal the sick but to remind them of the remedy God
has already given them. It is not their hands that heal. It is not their
voice that speaks the Word of God. They merely give what has been given
them. Very gently they call to their brothers to turn away from death.
Behold, you Son of God, what life can offer you. Would you choose
sickness in place of this?

^10^ Not once do the advanced teachers of God consider the forms of
sickness in which their brother believes. To do this is to forget that
all of them have the same purpose and therefore are not really
different. They seek for God's Voice in this brother who would so
deceive himself as to believe God's Son can suffer. And they remind him
that he has not made himself and must remain as God created him. They
recognize illusions can have no effect. The truth in their minds reaches
out to the truth in the minds of their brothers, so that illusions are
not reinforced. They are thus brought to truth, and truth is not brought
to them. So are they dispelled, not by the will of another but by the
union of the One Will with itself. And this is the function of God's
teachers---to see no will as separate from their own, nor theirs as
separate from God's.
:::

[]{#part0070.html}

::: {.body}
# [**6. Is Healing Certain?**](#part0004.html#chap-52) {#part0070.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Healing is always certain. It is impossible to let illusions be
brought to truth and keep the illusions. Truth demonstrates illusions
have no value. The teacher of God has seen the correction of his errors
in the mind of the patient, recognizing it for what it is. Having
accepted the Atonement for himself, he has also accepted it for the
patient. Yet what if the patient uses sickness as a way of life,
believing healing is the way to death? When this is so, a sudden healing
might precipitate intense depression, and a sense of loss so deep that
the patient might even try to destroy himself. Having nothing to live
for, he may ask for death. Healing must wait, for his protection.

^2^ Healing will always stand aside when it would be seen as threat. The
instant it is welcome it is there. Where healing has been given, it will
be received. And what is time before the gifts of God? We have referred
many times in the text to the storehouse of treasures laid up equally
for the giver and the receiver of God's gifts. Not one is lost, for they
can but increase. No teacher of God should feel disappointed if he has
offered healing and it does not appear to have been received. It is not
up to him to judge when his gift should be accepted. Let him be certain
it has been received and trust that it will be accepted when it is
recognized as a blessing and not a curse.

^3^ It is not the function of God's teachers to evaluate the outcome of
their gifts. It is merely their function to give them. Once they have
done that, they have also given the outcome, for that is part of the
gift. No one can give if he is concerned with the result of the giving.
That is a limitation on the giving itself, and neither the giver nor the
receiver would have the gift. Trust is an essential part of giving; in
fact, it is the part that makes sharing possible, the part that
guarantees the giver will not lose but only gain. Who gives a gift and
then remains with it to be sure it is used as the giver deems
appropriate? Such is not giving but imprisoning.

^4^ It is the relinquishing of all concern about the gift that makes it
truly given. And it is trust that makes true giving possible. Healing is
the change of mind that the Holy Spirit in the patient's mind is seeking
for him. And it is the Holy Spirit in the mind of the giver Who gives
the gift to Him. How can it be lost? How can it be ineffectual? How can
it be wasted? God's treasure house can never be empty. And if one gift
were missing, it would not be full. Yet is its fullness guaranteed by
God. What concern, then, can a teacher of God have about what becomes of
his gifts? Given by God to God, who in this holy exchange can receive
less than everything?
:::

[]{#part0071.html}

::: {.body}
# [**7. Should Healing Be Repeated?**](#part0004.html#chap-53) {#part0071.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ This question really answers itself. Healing cannot be repeated. If
the patient is healed, what remains to heal him from? And if the healing
is certain, as we have already said it is, what is there to repeat? For
a teacher of God to remain concerned about the result of healing is to
limit the healing. It is now the teacher of God himself whose mind needs
to be healed. And it is this he must facilitate. He is now the patient,
and he must so regard himself. He has made a mistake and must be willing
to change his mind about it. He lacked the trust that makes for giving
truly, and so he has not received the benefit of his gift.

^2^ Whenever a teacher of God has tried to be a channel for healing, he
has succeeded. Should he be tempted to doubt this, he should not repeat
his previous effort. That was already maximal because the Holy Spirit so
accepted it and so used it. Now the teacher of God has only one course
to follow. He must use his reason to tell himself that he has given the
problem to One Who cannot fail, and recognize that his own uncertainty
is not love but fear and therefore hate. His position has thus become
untenable, for he is offering hate to one to whom he offered love. This
is impossible. Having offered love, only love can be received.

^3^ It is in this that the teacher of God must trust. This is what is
really meant by the statement that the one responsibility of the miracle
worker is to accept the Atonement for himself. The teacher of God is a
miracle worker because he gives the gifts he has received. Yet he must
first accept them. He need do no more, nor is there more that he could
do. By accepting healing, he can give it. If he doubts this, let him
remember Who gave the gift and Who received it. Thus is his doubt
corrected. He thought the gifts of God could be withdrawn. That was a
mistake, but hardly one to stay with. And so the teacher of God can only
recognize it for what it is and let it be corrected for him.

^4^ One of the most difficult temptations to recognize is that to doubt
a healing because of the appearance of continuing symptoms is a mistake
in the form of lack of trust. As such, it is an attack. Usually it seems
to be just the opposite. It does appear unreasonable at first to be told
that continued concern is attack. It has all the appearances of love.
Yet love without trust is impossible, and doubt and trust cannot
coexist. And hate must be the opposite of love, regardless of the form
it takes. Doubt not the gift, and it is impossible to doubt its result.
This is the certainty that gives God's teachers the power to be miracle
workers, for they have put their trust in Him.

^5^ The real basis for doubt about the outcome of any problem that has
been given to God's Teacher for resolution is always self-doubt. And
that necessarily implies that trust has been placed in an illusory self,
for only such a self can be doubted. This illusion can take many forms.
Perhaps there is a fear of weakness and vulnerability. Perhaps there is
a fear of failure and shame associated with a sense of inadequacy.
Perhaps there is a guilty embarrassment stemming from false humility.
The form of the mistake is not important. What is important is only the
recognition of a mistake as a mistake.

^6^ The mistake is always some form of concern with the self to the
exclusion of the patient. It is a failure to recognize him as part of
the self and thus represents a confusion in identity. Conflict about
what you are has entered your mind, and you have become deceived about
yourself. And you are deceived about yourself because you have denied
the Source of your creation. If you are offering only healing, you
cannot doubt. If you really want the problem solved, you cannot doubt.
If you are certain what the problem is, you cannot doubt. Doubt is the
result of conflicting wishes. Be sure of what you want, and doubt
becomes impossible.
:::

[]{#part0072.html}

::: {.body}
# [**8. How Can the Perception of Order of Difficulties Be Avoided?**](#part0004.html#chap-54) {#part0072.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The belief in order of difficulties is the basis for the world's
perception. It rests on differences; on uneven background and shifting
foreground, on unequal heights and diverse sizes, on varying degrees of
darkness and light, and thousands of contrasts in which each thing seen
competes with every other in order to be recognized. A larger object
overshadows a smaller one. A brighter thing draws the attention from
another with less intensity of appeal. And a more threatening idea or
one conceived of as more desirable by the world's standards completely
upsets the mental balance. What the body's eyes behold is only conflict.
Look not to them for peace and understanding.

^2^ Illusions are always illusions of differences. How could it be
otherwise? By definition, an illusion is an attempt to make something
real that is regarded as of major importance but is recognized as being
untrue. The mind therefore seeks to make it true out of its intensity of
desire to have it for itself. Illusions are travesties of creation,
attempts to bring truth to lies. Finding truth unacceptable, the mind
revolts against truth and gives itself an illusion of victory. Finding
health a burden, it retreats into feverish dreams. And in these dreams,
the mind is separate, different from other minds, with different
interests of its own and able to gratify its needs at the expense of
others.

^3^ Where do all these differences come from? Certainly they seem to be
in the world outside. Yet it is surely the mind that judges what the
eyes behold. It is the mind that interprets the eyes' messages and gives
them "meaning." And this meaning does not exist in the world outside at
all. What is seen as "reality" is simply what the mind prefers. Its
hierarchy of values is projected outward, and it sends the body's eyes
to find it. The body's eyes will never see except through differences.
Yet it is not the messages they bring on which perception rests. Only
the mind evaluates their messages, so only the mind is responsible for
seeing. It alone decides whether what is seen is real or illusory,
desirable or undesirable, pleasurable or painful.

^4^ It is in the sorting out and categorizing activities of the mind
that errors in perception enter. And it is here correction must be made.
The mind classifies what the body's eyes bring to it according to its
preconceived values, judging where each sense datum fits best. What
basis could be faultier than this? Unrecognized by itself, it has itself
asked to be given what will fit into these categories. And having done
so, it concludes that the categories must be true. On this the judgment
of all differences rests because it is on this that judgments of the
world depend. Can this confused and senseless "reasoning" be depended on
for anything?

^5^ There can be no order of difficulty in healing merely because all
sickness is illusion. Is it harder to dispel the belief of the insane in
a larger hallucination as opposed to a smaller one? Will he agree more
quickly to the unreality of a louder voice he hears than to that of a
softer one? Will he dismiss more easily a whispered demand to kill than
a shout? And do the number of pitchforks the devils he sees carrying
affect their credibility in his perception? His mind has categorized
them as real, and so they are real to him. When he realizes they are all
illusions, they will disappear. And so it is with healing. The
properties of illusions which seem to make them different are really
irrelevant, for their properties are as illusory as they are.

^6^ The body's eyes will continue to see differences, but the mind which
has let itself be healed will no longer acknowledge them. There will be
those who seem to be "sicker" than others, and the body's eyes will
report their changed appearances as before. But the mind will put them
all in one category---they are unreal. This is the gift of its
Teacher---the understanding that only two categories are meaningful in
sorting out the messages the mind receives from what appears to be the
outside world. And of these two, but one is real. Just as reality is
wholly real, apart from size and shape and time and place---for
differences cannot exist within it---so too are illusions without
distinction. The one answer to sickness of any kind is healing. The one
answer to all illusions is truth.
:::

[]{#part0073.html}

::: {.body}
# [**9. Are Changes Required in the Life Situation of God's Teachers?**](#part0004.html#chap-55) {#part0073.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Changes are required in the minds of God's teachers. This may or may
not involve changes in the external situation. Remember that no one is
where he is by accident, and chance plays no part in God's plan. It is
most unlikely that changes in his attitudes would not be the first step
in the newly-made teacher of God's training. There is however no set
pattern, since training is always highly individualized. There are those
who are called upon to change their life situation almost immediately,
but these are generally special cases. By far the majority are given a
slowly-evolving training program in which as many previous mistakes as
possible are corrected. Relationships in particular must be properly
perceived and all dark cornerstones of unforgiveness removed. Otherwise,
the old thought-system still has a basis for return.

^2^ As the teacher of God advances in his training, he learns one lesson
with increasing thoroughness. He does not make his own decisions; he
asks his Teacher for His answer, and it is this he follows as his guide
for action. This becomes easier and easier as the teacher of God learns
to give up his own judgment. The giving up of judgment, the obvious
prerequisite for hearing God's Voice, is usually a fairly slow process,
not because it is difficult, but because it is apt to be perceived as
personally insulting. The world's training is directed toward achieving
a goal in direct opposition to that of our curriculum. The world trains
for reliance on one's judgment as the criterion for maturity and
strength. Our curriculum trains for the relinquishment of judgment as
the necessary condition of salvation.
:::

[]{#part0074.html}

::: {.body}
# [**10. How Is Judgment Relinquished?**](#part0004.html#chap-56) {#part0074.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Judgment, like other devices by which the world of illusions is
maintained, is totally misunderstood by the world. It is actually
confused with wisdom and substitutes for truth. As the world uses the
term, an individual is capable of "good" and "bad" judgment, and his
education aims at strengthening the former and minimizing the latter.
There is, however, considerable confusion about what these categories
mean. What is "good judgment" to one is "bad judgment" to another.
Further, even the same person classifies the same action as showing
"good" judgment at one time and "bad" judgment at another time. Nor can
any consistent criteria for determining what these categories are be
really taught. At any time, the student may disagree with what his
would-be teacher says about them, and the teacher himself is
inconsistent in what he believes.

^2^ "Good judgment" in these terms does not mean anything. No more does
"bad." It is necessary for the teacher of God to realize not that he
should not judge, but that he cannot. In giving up judgment, he merely
gives up what he did not have. He gives up an illusion; or better, he
has an illusion of giving up. He has actually merely become more honest.
Recognizing that judgment was always impossible for him, he no longer
attempts it. This is no sacrifice. On the contrary, he puts himself in a
position where judgment through him rather than by him can occur. And
this judgment is neither "good" nor "bad." It is the only judgment there
is, and it is only one: "God's Son is guiltless, and sin does not
exist."

^3^ The aim of our curriculum, unlike the goal of the world's learning,
is the recognition that judgment in the usual sense is impossible. This
is not an opinion, but a fact. In order to judge anything rightly, one
would have to be fully aware of an inconceivably wide range of things,
past, present, and to come. One would have to recognize in advance all
the effects of his judgments on everyone and everything involved in them
in any way. And one would have to be certain there is no distortion in
his perception, so that his judgment would be wholly fair to everyone on
whom it rests, now and in the future. Who is in a position to do this?
Who except in grandiose fantasies would claim this for himself?

^4^ Remember how many times you thought you knew all the "facts" you
needed for judgment, and how wrong you were! Is there anyone who has not
had this experience? Would you know how many times you merely thought
you were right, without ever realizing you were wrong? Why would you
choose such an arbitrary basis for decision-making? Wisdom is not
judgment; it is the relinquishment of judgment. Make then but one more
judgment. It is this---there is Someone with you Whose judgment is
perfect. He does know all the facts, past, present, and to come. He does
know all the effects of His judgment on everyone and everything involved
in any way. And He is wholly fair to everyone, for there is no
distortion in His perception.

^5^ Therefore lay judgment down, not with regret but with a sigh of
gratitude. Now are you free of a burden so great that you could merely
stagger and fall down beneath it. And it was all illusion. Nothing more.
Now can the teacher of God rise up unburdened and walk lightly on. Yet
it is not only this that is his benefit. His sense of care is gone, for
he has none. He has given it away, along with judgment. He gave himself
to Him Whose judgment he has chosen now to trust instead of his own. Now
he makes no mistakes. His Guide is sure. And where he came to judge, he
comes to bless. Where now he laughs, he used to come to weep.

^6^ It is not difficult to relinquish judgment. But it is difficult
indeed to try to keep it. The teacher of God lays it down happily the
instant he recognizes its cost. All of the ugliness he sees about him is
its outcome. All of the pain he looks upon is its result. All of the
loneliness and sense of loss, of passing time and growing hopelessness;
of sickening despair and fear of death---all these have come of it. And
now he knows that these things need not be. Not one is true. For he has
given up their cause, and they, which never were but the effects of his
mistaken choice, have fallen from him. Teacher of God, this step will
bring you peace. Can it be difficult to want but this?
:::

[]{#part0075.html}

::: {.body}
# [**11. How Is Peace Possible in this World?**](#part0004.html#chap-57) {#part0075.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ This is a question everyone must ask. Certainly peace seems to be
impossible. Yet the Word of God promises other things that seem
impossible, as well as this. His Word has promised peace. It has also
promised that there is no death, that resurrection must occur, and that
rebirth is man's inheritance. The world you see cannot be the world God
loves, and yet His Word assures us that He loves the world. God's Word
has promised us that peace is possible here, and what He promises can
hardly be impossible. But it is true that the world must be looked at
differently if His promises are to be accepted. What the world is, is
but a fact. You cannot choose what this should be. But you can choose
how you would see it. Indeed, you must choose this.

^2^ Again we come to the question of judgment. This time, ask yourself
whether your judgment or the Word of God is more likely to be true. For
they say different things about the world, and things so opposite that
it is pointless to try to reconcile them. God offers the world
salvation; your judgment would condemn it. God says there is no death;
your judgment sees but death as the inevitable end of life. God's Word
assures you that He loves the world; your judgment says it is unlovable.
Who is right? For one of you is wrong. It must be so.

^3^ The text explains that the Holy Spirit is the Answer to all problems
you have made. These problems are not real, but that is meaningless to
those who believe in them. And everyone believes in what he made, for it
was made by his believing it. Into this strange and paradoxical
situation---one without meaning and devoid of sense, yet out of which no
way seems possible---God has sent His Judgment to answer yours. Gently
His Judgment substitutes for yours. And through this substitution is the
ununderstandable made understandable. How is peace possible in this
world? In your judgment it is not possible and can never be possible.
But in the Judgment of God, what is reflected here is only peace.

^4^ Peace is impossible to those who look on war. Peace is inevitable to
those who offer peace. How easily, then, is your judgment of the world
escaped! It is not the world that makes peace seem impossible. It is the
world you see that is impossible. Yet has God's Judgment on this
distorted world redeemed it and made it fit to welcome peace. And peace
descends on it in joyous answer. Peace now belongs here because a
Thought of God has entered. What else but a Thought of God turns hell to
Heaven merely by being what it is? The earth bows down before its
gracious Presence, and it leans down in answer to raise it up again. Now
is the question different. It is no longer, "Can peace be possible in
this world?" but instead, "Is it not impossible that peace be absent
here?"
:::

[]{#part0076.html}

::: {.body}
# [**12. How Many Teachers of God Are Needed to Save the World?**](#part0004.html#chap-58) {#part0076.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The answer to this question is "one." One wholly perfect teacher
whose learning is complete suffices. This One, sanctified and redeemed,
becomes the Self Who is the Son of God. He who was always wholly spirit
now no longer sees Himself as a body or even as in a body. Therefore He
is limitless. And being limitless, His thoughts are joined with God's
forever and ever. His perception of himself is based upon God's
Judgment, not His own. Thus does He share God's Will, and bring His
Thoughts to still deluded minds. He is forever One because He is as God
created Him. He has accepted Christ, and He is saved.

^2^ Thus does the son of man become the Son of God. It is not really a
change; it is a change of mind. Nothing external alters, but everything
internal now reflects only the love of God. God can no longer be feared,
for the mind sees no cause for punishment. God's teachers appear to be
many, for that is the world's need. Yet being joined in one purpose, and
one they share with God, how could they be separate from each other?
What does it matter if they then appear in many forms? Their minds are
one; their joining is complete. And God works through them now as One,
for that is what they are.

^3^ Why is the illusion of many necessary? Only because reality is not
understandable to the deluded. Only a very few can hear God's Voice at
all, and even they cannot communicate His messages directly through the
Spirit Which gave them. They need a medium through which communication
becomes possible to those who do not realize that they are spirit. A
body they can see. A voice they understand and listen to without the
fear that truth would encounter in them. Do not forget that truth can
come only where it is welcomed without fear. So do God's teachers need a
body, for their unity could not be recognized directly.

^4^ Yet what makes them God's teachers is their recognition of the
proper purpose of the body. As they advance in their profession, they
become more and more certain that the body's function is but to let
God's Voice speak through it to human ears. And these ears will carry to
the mind of the hearer messages which are not of this world, and the
mind will understand because of their Source. From this understanding
will come the recognition in this new teacher of God of what the body's
purpose really is; the only use there really is for it. This lesson is
enough to let the thought of unity come in, and what is one is
recognized as one. The teachers of God appear to share the illusion of
separation, but because of what they use the body for, they do not
believe in the illusion despite appearances.

^5^ The central lesson is always this---that what you use the body for,
it will become to you. Use it for sin or for attack, which is the same
as sin, and you will see it as sinful. Because it is sinful, it is weak,
and being weak, it suffers and it dies. Use it to bring the Word of God
to those who have it not, and the body becomes holy. Because it is holy
it cannot be sick, nor can it die. When its usefulness is done, it is
laid by, and that is all. The mind makes this decision, as it makes all
decisions which are responsible for the body's condition. Yet the
teacher of God does not make this decision alone. To do that would be to
give the body another purpose from the one that keeps it holy. God's
Voice will tell him when he has fulfilled his role, just as It tells him
what his function is. He does not suffer either in going or remaining.
Sickness is now impossible to him.

^6^ Oneness and sickness cannot co-exist. God's teachers choose to look
on dreams a while. It is a conscious choice. For they have learned that
all choices are made consciously, with full awareness of their
consequences. The dream says otherwise, but who would put his faith in
dreams, once they are recognized for what they are? Awareness of
dreaming is the real function of God's teachers. They watch the dream
figures come and go, shift and change, suffer and die. Yet they are not
deceived by what they see. They recognize that to behold a dream figure
as sick and separate is no more real than to regard it as healthy and
beautiful. Unity alone is not a thing of dreams. And it is this God's
teachers acknowledge as behind the dream, beyond all seeing and yet
surely theirs.
:::

[]{#part0077.html}

::: {.body}
# [**13. What Is the Real Meaning of Sacrifice?**](#part0004.html#chap-59) {#part0077.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Although in truth the term sacrifice is altogether meaningless, it
does have meaning in the world. Like all things in the world, its
meaning is temporary and will ultimately fade into the nothingness from
which it came when there is no more use for it. Now its real meaning is
a lesson. Like all lessons, it is an illusion, for in reality there is
nothing to learn. Yet this illusion must be replaced by a corrective
device, another illusion that replaces the first, so both can finally
disappear. The first illusion, which must be displaced before another
thought system can take hold, is that it is a sacrifice to give up the
things of this world. What could this be but an illusion, since this
world itself is nothing more than that?

^2^ It takes great learning both to realize and to accept the fact that
the world has nothing to give. What can the sacrifice of nothing mean?
It cannot mean that you have less because of it. There is no sacrifice
in the world's terms that does not involve the body. Think a while about
what the world calls sacrifice. Power, fame, money, physical
pleasure---who is the hero to whom all these things belong? Could they
mean anything except to a body? Yet a body cannot evaluate. By seeking
after such things, the mind associates itself with the body, obscuring
its identity and losing sight of what it really is.

^3^ Once this confusion has occurred, it becomes impossible for the mind
to understand that all the "pleasures" of the world are nothing. But
what a sacrifice---and it is sacrifice indeed---all this entails! Now
has the mind condemned itself to seek without finding, to be forever
dissatisfied and discontented, to know not what it really wants to find.
Who can escape this self-condemnation? Only through God's Word could
this be possible. For self-condemnation is a decision about identity,
and no one doubts what he believes he is. He can doubt all things but
never this.

^4^ God's teachers can have no regret on giving up the pleasures of the
world. Is it a sacrifice to give up pain? Does an adult resent the
giving up of children's toys? Does one whose vision has already glimpsed
the face of Christ look back with longing on a slaughter house? No one
who has escaped the world and all its ills looks back on it with
condemnation. Yet he must rejoice that he is free of all the sacrifice
which its value would demand of him. To them he sacrifices all his
freedom. To them he sacrifices all his peace. And to possess them must
he sacrifice his hope of Heaven and remembrance of his Father's Love.
Who in his sane mind chooses nothing as a substitute for everything?

^5^ What is the real meaning of sacrifice? It is the cost of believing
in illusions. It is the price that must be paid for the denial of truth.
There is no pleasure of the world that does not demand this, for
otherwise the pleasure would be seen as pain. And no one asks for pain
if he recognizes it. It is the idea of sacrifice that makes him blind.
He does not see what he is asking for. And so he seeks it in a thousand
ways and in a thousand places, each time believing it is there and each
time disappointed in the end. "Seek but do not find," remains this
world's stern decree, and no one who pursues the world's goals can do
otherwise.

^6^ You may believe this course requires sacrifice of all you really
hold dear. In one sense that is true, for you hold dear the things that
crucify God's Son. And it is the course's aim to set him free. But do
not be mistaken about what sacrifice means. It always means the giving
up of what you want. And what, oh teacher of God, is it that you want?
You have been called by God, and you have answered. Would you now
sacrifice that Call? Few have heard it as yet, and they can but turn to
you. There is no other hope in all the world that they can trust. There
is no other voice in all the world that echoes God's. If you would
sacrifice the truth, they stay in hell. And if they stay, you will
remain with them.

^7^ Do not forget that sacrifice is total. There are no "half
sacrifices." You cannot give up Heaven partially. You cannot be a little
bit in hell. The Word of God has no exceptions. It is this that makes it
holy and beyond the world. It is its holiness that points to God. It is
its holiness that makes you safe. It is denied if you attack any brother
for anything. For it is here the split with God occurs. A split that is
impossible. A split that cannot happen. Yet a split in which you surely
will believe, because you have set up a situation that is impossible.
And in this situation the impossible can seem to happen. It seems to
happen at the "sacrifice" of truth.

^8^ Teacher of God, do not forget the meaning of sacrifice, and remember
what each decision you make must mean in terms of cost. Decide for God,
and everything is given you at no cost at all. Decide against Him, and
you choose nothing at the expense of the awareness of everything. What
would you teach? Remember only what you would learn. For it is here that
your concern should be. Atonement is for you. Your learning claims it,
and your learning gives it. The world contains it not, but learn this
course and it is yours. God holds out His Word to you, for He has need
of teachers. What other way is there to save His Son?
:::

[]{#part0078.html}

::: {.body}
# [**14. How Will the World End?**](#part0004.html#chap-60) {#part0078.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Can what has no beginning really end? The world will end in an
illusion, as it began. Yet will its ending be an illusion of mercy. The
illusion of forgiveness, complete, excluding no one, limitless in
gentleness, will cover it, hiding all evil, concealing all sin, and
ending guilt forever. So ends the world that guilt had made, for now it
has no purpose and is gone. The father of illusions is the belief that
they have a purpose; that they serve a need or gratify a want. Perceived
as purposeless, they are no longer seen. Their uselessness is
recognized, and they are gone. How but in this way are all illusions
ended? They have been brought to truth, and truth saw them not. It
merely overlooked the meaningless.

^2^ Until forgiveness is complete, the world does have a purpose. It
becomes the home in which forgiveness is born and where it grows and
becomes stronger and more all embracing. Here is it nourished, for here
it is needed. A gentle Savior, born where sin was made and guilt seemed
real. Here is His home, for here there is need of Him indeed. He brings
the ending of the world with Him. It is His Call God's teachers answer,
turning to Him in silence to receive His Word. The world will end when
all things in it have been rightly judged by His judgment. The world
will end with the benediction of holiness upon it. When not one thought
of sin remains, the world is over. It will not be destroyed nor attacked
nor even touched. It will merely cease to seem to be.

^3^ Certainly this seems to be a long, long while away. "When not one
thought of sin remains" appears to be a long-range goal indeed. But time
stands still and waits on the goals of God's teachers. Not one thought
of sin will remain the instant any one of them accepts the Atonement for
himself. It is not easier to forgive one sin than to forgive all of
them. The illusion of orders of difficulty is an obstacle the teacher of
God must learn to pass by and leave behind. One sin perfectly forgiven
by one teacher of God can make salvation complete. Can you understand
this? No; it is meaningless to anyone here. Yet it is the final lesson
in which unity is restored. It goes against all the thinking of the
world, but so does Heaven.

^4^ The world will end when its thought system has been completely
reversed. Until then, bits and pieces of its thinking will still seem
sensible. The final lesson which brings the ending of the world cannot
be grasped by those not yet prepared to leave the world and go beyond
its tiny reach. What, then, is the function of the teacher of God in
this concluding lesson? He need merely learn how to approach it, to be
willing to go in its direction. He need merely trust that, if God's
Voice tells him it is a lesson he can learn, he can learn it. He does
not judge it either as hard or easy. His Teacher points to it, and he
trusts that He will show him how to learn it.

^5^ The world will end in joy because it is a place of sorrow. When joy
has come, the purpose of the world has gone. The world will end in peace
because it is a place of war. When peace has come, what is the purpose
of the world? The world will end in laughter because it is a place of
tears. Where there is laughter, who can longer weep? And only complete
forgiveness brings all this to bless the world. In blessing it departs,
for it will not end as it began. To turn hell into Heaven is the
function of God's teachers, for what they teach are lessons in which
Heaven is reflected. And now sit down in true humility and realize that
all God would have you do you can do. Do not be arrogant and say you
cannot learn His own curriculum. His Word says otherwise. His Will be
done. It cannot be otherwise. And be you thankful it is so.
:::

[]{#part0079.html}

::: {.body}
# [**15. Is Each One to Be Judged in the End?**](#part0004.html#chap-61) {#part0079.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Indeed yes! No one can escape God's Final Judgment. Who could flee
forever from the truth? But the Final Judgment will not come until it is
no longer associated with fear. One day each one will welcome it, and on
that very day it will be given him. He will hear his sinlessness
proclaimed around and around the world, setting it free as God's Final
Judgment on him is received. This is the judgment in which salvation
lies. This is the judgment that will set him free. This is the judgment
in which all things are freed with him. Time pauses as eternity comes
near, and silence lies across the world that everyone may hear this
judgment of the Son of God:

*^2^ Holy are you, eternal, free, and whole,\
At peace forever in the Heart of God.\
Where is the world and where is sorrow now?*

^3^ Is this your judgment on yourself, teacher of God? Do you believe
that this is wholly true? No, not yet, not yet. But this is still your
goal---why you are here. It is your function to prepare yourself to hear
this judgment and to recognize that it is true. One instant of complete
belief in this, and you will go beyond belief to certainty. One instant
out of time can bring time's end. Judge not, for you but judge yourself
and thus delay this Final Judgment. What is your judgment on the world,
teacher of God? Have you yet learned to stand aside and hear the Voice
of Judgment in yourself? Or do you still attempt to take His role from
Him? Learn to be quiet, for His Voice is heard in stillness. And His
Judgment comes to all who stand aside in quiet listening and wait for
Him.

^4^ You who are sometimes sad and sometimes angry, who sometimes feel
your just due is not given you and your best efforts meet with lack of
appreciation and even contempt, give up these foolish thoughts. They are
too small and meaningless to occupy your holy minds an instant longer.
God's judgment waits for you to set you free. What can the world hold
out to you, regardless of your judgments on its gifts, that you would
rather have? You will be judged, and judged in fairness and in honesty.
There is no deceit in God. His promises are sure. Only remember that.
His promises have guaranteed that His judgment, and His alone, will be
accepted in the end. It is your function to make that end be soon. It is
your function to hold it to your heart and offer it to all the world to
keep it safe.
:::

[]{#part0080.html}

::: {.body}
# [**16. How Should the Teacher Spend His Day?**](#part0004.html#chap-62) {#part0080.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ To the advanced teacher of God, this question is meaningless. There
is no program, for the lessons in the curriculum change each day. Yet he
is sure of but one thing---they do not change at random. Seeing this and
understanding it is true, he rests content. He will be told all that his
role should be, this day and every day. And those who share that role
with him will find him, so they can learn the lessons for the day
together. Not one is absent whom he needs; not one is sent without a
learning goal already set, and one which can be met that very day. For
the advanced teacher of God, then, this question is superfluous. It has
been asked and answered, and he keeps in constant contact with the
Answer. He is set and sees the road on which he walks stretch surely and
smoothly before him.

^2^ But what about those who have not reached his certainty? They are
not yet ready for such lack of structuring on their own part. What must
they do to learn to give the day to God? There are some general rules
which do apply, although each one must use them as best he can in his
own way. Routines as such are dangerous because they easily become gods
in their own right, threatening the very goals for which they were set
up. Broadly speaking, then, it can be said that it is well to start the
day right. It is always possible to begin again, should the day begin
with error, yet there are obvious advantages in terms of saving time if
the need for this can be avoided.

^3^ At the beginning, it is wise to think in terms of time. This is by
no means the ultimate criterion, but at the outset, it is probably the
simplest to observe. The saving of time is an essential early emphasis
which, although it remains important throughout the learning process,
becomes less and less emphasized. At the outset, we can safely say that
time devoted to starting the day right does indeed save time. How much
time should be so spent? This must depend on the teacher of God himself.
He cannot claim that title until he has gone through the workbook, since
we are learning within the framework of our course. After completion of
the more structured practice periods which the workbook contains,
individual need becomes the chief consideration.

^4^ This course is always practical. It may be that the teacher of God
is not in a situation which fosters quiet thought as he awakes. If this
is so, let him but remember that he chooses to spend time with God as
soon as possible, and let him do so. Duration is not the major concern.
One can easily sit still an hour with closed eyes and accomplish
nothing. One can as easily give God only an instant, and in that instant
join with Him completely. Perhaps the one generalization that can be
made is this---as soon as possible after waking, take your quiet time,
continuing a minute or two after you begin to find it difficult. You may
find that the difficulty will diminish and drop away. If not, that is
the time to stop.

^5^ The same procedures should be followed at night. Perhaps your quiet
time should be fairly early in the evening if it is not feasible for you
to take it just before going to sleep. It is not wise to lie down for
it. It is better to sit up, in whatever position you prefer. Having gone
through the workbook you must have come to some conclusions in this
respect. If possible, however, just before going to sleep is a desirable
time to devote to God. It sets your mind into a pattern of rest and
orients you away from fear. If it is expedient to spend this time
earlier, at least be sure that you do not forget a brief period---not
more than a moment will do---in which you close your eyes and think of
God.

^6^ There is one thought in particular that should be remembered
throughout the day. It is a thought of pure joy, a thought of peace, a
thought of limitless release---limitless because all things are freed
within it. You think you made a place of safety for yourself. You think
you made a power that can save you from all the fearful things you see
in dreams. It is not so. Your safety lies not there. What you give up is
merely the illusion of protecting illusions. And it is this you fear,
and only this. How foolish to be so afraid of nothing! Nothing at all!
Your defenses will not work, but you are not in danger. You have no need
of them. Recognize this, and they will disappear. And only then will you
accept your real protection.

^7^ How simply and how easily does the day slip by for the teacher of
God who has accepted His protection! All that he did before in the name
of safety no longer interests him. For he is safe and knows it to be so.
He has a Guide Who will not fail. He need make no distinctions among the
problems he perceives, for He to Whom he turns with all of them
recognizes no order of difficulty in resolving them. He is as safe in
the present as he was before illusions were accepted into his mind and
as he will be when he has let them go. There is no difference in his
state at different times and different places because they are all one
to God. This is his safety. And he has no need for more than this.

^8^ Yet there will be temptations along the way the teacher of God has
yet to travel, and he has need of reminding himself throughout the day
of his protection. How can he do this, particularly during the time when
his mind is occupied with external things? He can but try, and his
success depends on his conviction that he will succeed. He must be sure
success is not of him but will be given him at any time, in any place
and circumstance he calls for it. There are times his certainty will
waver, and the instant this occurs he will return to earlier attempts to
place reliance on himself alone. Forget not this is magic and that magic
is a sorry substitute for true assistance. It is not good enough for
God's teacher because it is not enough for God's Son.

^9^ The avoidance of magic is the avoidance of temptation. For all
temptation is nothing more than the attempt to substitute another will
for God's. These attempts may indeed seem frightening, yet they are
merely pathetic. They can have no effects, neither good nor bad, neither
rewarding nor demanding sacrifice, healing nor destructive, quieting nor
fearful. When all magic is recognized as merely nothing, the teacher of
God has reached the most advanced state. All intermediate lessons will
but lead to this and bring this goal nearer to recognition. For magic of
any kind, in all its forms, simply does nothing. Its powerlessness is
the reason it can be so easily escaped. What has no effects can hardly
terrify.

^10^ There is no substitute for the Will of God. In simple statement, it
is to this fact that the teacher of God devotes his day. Each substitute
he may accept as real can but deceive him. But he is safe from all
deception if he so decides. Perhaps he needs to remember "God is with
me. I cannot be deceived." Perhaps he prefers other words, or only one
or none at all. Yet each temptation to accept magic as true must be
abandoned through his recognition not that it is fearful, not that it is
sinful, not that it is dangerous, but merely that it is meaningless.
Rooted in sacrifice and separation, two aspects of one error and no
more, he merely chooses to give up all that he never had. And for this
"sacrifice" is Heaven restored to his awareness.

^11^ Is not this an exchange that you would want? The world would gladly
make it if it knew it could be made. It is God's teachers who must teach
it that it can. And so it is their function to make sure that they have
learned it. No risk is possible throughout the day except to put your
trust in magic, for it is only this that leads to pain. "There is no
will but God's." His teachers know that this is so and have learned that
everything but this is magic. All belief in magic is maintained by just
one simple-minded illusion---that it works. All through his training,
every day and hour, and even every minute and second, must God's
teachers learn to recognize the forms of magic and perceive their
meaninglessness. Fear is withdrawn from them, and so they go. And thus
the Gate of Heaven is reopened, and its light can shine again on an
untroubled mind.
:::

[]{#part0081.html}

::: {.body}
# [**17. How do God's Teachers Deal With Their Pupils' Thoughts of Magic?**](#part0004.html#chap-63) {#part0081.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ This is a crucial question both for teacher and pupil. If this issue
is mishandled, the teacher has hurt himself and has also attacked his
pupil. This strengthens fear and makes the magic seem quite real to both
of them. How to deal with magic thus becomes a major lesson for the
teacher of God to master. His first responsibility in this is not to
attack it. If a magic thought arouses anger in any form, God's teacher
can be sure that he is strengthening his own belief in sin and has
condemned himself. He can be sure as well that he has asked for
depression, pain, fear, and disaster to come to him. Let him remember,
then, it is not this that he would teach because it is not this that he
would learn.

^2^ There is, however, a temptation to respond to magic in a way that
reinforces it. Nor is this always obvious. It can, in fact, be easily
concealed beneath a wish to help. It is this double wish that makes the
help of little value and must lead to undesired outcomes. Nor should it
be forgotten that the outcome that results will always come to teacher
and to pupil. How many times has it been emphasized that you give but to
yourself? And where could this be better shown than in the kinds of help
the teacher gives to those who need his aid? Here is his gift most
clearly given him. For he will give only what he has chosen for himself.
And in this gift is his judgment upon the holy Son of God.

^3^ It is easiest to let error be corrected where it is most apparent,
and errors can be recognized by their results. A lesson truly taught can
lead to nothing but release for teacher and pupil who have shared in one
intent. Attack can enter only if perception of separate goals has
entered. And this must indeed have been the case if the result is
anything but joy. The single aim of the teacher turns the divided goal
of the pupil into one direction, with the call for help becoming his one
appeal. This then is easily responded to with just one answer, and this
answer will enter the teacher's mind unfailingly. From there it shines
into his pupil's mind, making it one with his.

^4^ Perhaps it will be helpful to remember that no one can be angry at a
fact. It is always an interpretation that gives rise to negative
emotions, regardless of their seeming justification by what appears as
facts. Regardless, too, of the intensity of the anger that is aroused.
It may be merely slight irritation, perhaps too mild to be even clearly
recognized. Or it may also take the form of intense rage accompanied by
thoughts of violence, fantasied or apparently acted out. It does not
matter. All of these reactions are the same. They obscure the truth, and
this can never be a matter of degree. Either truth is apparent or it is
not. It cannot be partially recognized. Who is unaware of truth must
look upon illusions.

^5^ Anger in response to perceived magic thoughts is the basic cause of
fear. Consider what this reaction means, and its centrality in the
world's thought system becomes apparent. A magic thought, by its mere
presence, acknowledges a separation from God. It states in the clearest
form possible that the mind which thinks it believes it has a separate
will that can oppose the Will of God and succeed. That this can hardly
be a fact is obvious. Yet that it can be believed as fact is surely so.
And herein lies the birthplace of guilt. Who usurps the place of God and
takes it for himself now has a deadly "enemy." And he must stand alone
in his protection and make himself a shield to keep him safe from fury
that can never be abated and vengeance that can never be satisfied.

^6^ How can this unfair battle be resolved? Its ending is inevitable,
for its outcome must be death. How then can one believe in one's
defenses? Magic again must help. Forget the battle. Accept it as a fact,
and then forget it. Do not remember the impossible odds against you. Do
not remember the immensity of the "enemy," and do not think about your
frailty in comparison. Accept your separation, but do not remember how
it came about. Believe that you have won it, but do not retain the
slightest memory of Who your great "opponent" really is. Projecting your
"forgetting" onto Him, it seems to you He has forgotten too.

^7^ But what will now be your reaction to all magic thoughts? They can
but reawaken sleeping guilt, which you have hidden but have not let go.
Each one says clearly to your frightened mind, "You have usurped the
place of God. Think not He has forgotten." Here we have the fear of God
most starkly represented. For in that thought has guilt already raised
madness to the throne of God Himself. And now there is no hope. Except
to kill. Here is salvation now. An angry Father pursues His guilty Son.
Kill or be killed, for here alone is choice. Beyond this there is none,
for what was done cannot be done without. The stain of blood can never
be removed, and anyone who bears this stain on him must meet with death.

^8^ Into this hopeless situation God sends His teachers. They bring the
light of hope from God Himself. There is a way in which escape is
possible. It can be learned and taught, but it requires patience and
abundant willingness. Given that, the lesson's manifest simplicity
stands out like an intense white light against a black horizon, for such
it is. If anger comes from an interpretation and not a fact, it is never
justified. Once this is even dimly grasped, the way is open. Now it is
possible to take the next step. The interpretation can be changed at
last. Magic thoughts need not lead to condemnation, for they do not
really have the power to give rise to guilt. And so they can be
overlooked and thus forgotten in the truest sense.

^9^ Madness but seems terrible. In truth it has no power to make
anything. Like the magic which becomes its servant, it neither attacks
nor protects. To see it and to recognize its thought system is to look
on nothing. Can nothing give rise to anger? Hardly so. Remember then,
teacher of God, that anger recognizes a reality that is not there, yet
is the anger certain witness that you do believe in it as fact. Now is
escape impossible until you see you have responded to your own
interpretation which you have projected on an outside world. Let this
grim sword be taken from you now. There is no death. This sword does not
exist. The fear of God is causeless. But His love is Cause of everything
beyond all fear and thus forever real and always true.
:::

[]{#part0082.html}

::: {.body}
# [**18. How Is Correction Made?**](#part0004.html#chap-64) {#part0082.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Correction of a lasting nature---and only this is true
correction---cannot be made until the teacher of God has ceased to
confuse interpretation with fact or illusion with truth. If he argues
with his pupil about a magic thought, attacks it, tries to establish its
error or demonstrate its falsity, he is but witnessing to its reality.
Depression is then inevitable, for he has "proved," both to his pupil
and himself that it is their task to escape from what is real. And this
can only be impossible. Reality is changeless. Magic thoughts are but
illusions. Otherwise salvation would be only the same age-old impossible
dream in but another form. Yet the dream of salvation has new content.
It is not the form alone in which the difference lies.

^2^ God's teachers' major lesson is to learn how to react to magic
thoughts wholly without anger. Only in this way can they proclaim the
truth about themselves. Through them, the Holy Spirit can now speak of
the reality of the Son of God. Now He can remind the world of
sinlessness, the one unchanged, unchangeable condition of all that God
created. Now He can speak the Word of God to listening ears and bring
Christ's vision to the eyes that see. Now is He free to teach all minds
the truth of what they are, so they will gladly be returned to Him. And
now is guilt forgiven, overlooked completely in His sight and in God's
Word.

^3^ Anger but screeches, "Guilt is real." Reality is blotted out as this
insane belief is taken as replacement for God's Word. The body's eyes
now "see"; its ears alone are thought to hear. Its little space and tiny
breath become the measure of reality. And truth becomes diminutive and
meaningless. Correction has one answer to all this and to the world that
rests on this:

^4^ You but mistake interpretation for the truth. And you are wrong. But
a mistake is not a sin, nor has reality been taken from its throne by
your mistakes. God reigns forever, and His laws alone prevail upon you
and upon the world. His love remains the only thing there is. Fear is
illusion, for you are like Him.

^5^ In order to heal, it thus becomes essential for the teacher of God
to let all his own mistakes be corrected. If he senses even the faintest
hint of irritation in himself as he responds to anyone, let him
instantly realize that he has made an interpretation that is not true.
Then let him turn within to his Eternal Guide, and let Him judge what
the response should be. So is he healed, and in his healing is his pupil
healed with him. The sole responsibility of God's teacher is to accept
the Atonement for himself. Atonement means correction, or the undoing of
errors. When this has been accomplished, the teacher of God becomes a
miracle worker by definition. His sins have been forgiven him, and he no
longer condemns himself. How can he then condemn anyone? And who is
there whom his forgiveness can fail to heal?
:::

[]{#part0083.html}

::: {.body}
# [**19. What Is Justice?**](#part0004.html#chap-65) {#part0083.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Justice is the divine correction for injustice. Injustice is the
basis for all the judgments of the world. Justice corrects the
interpretations to which injustice gives rise and cancels them out.
Neither justice nor injustice exists in Heaven, for error is impossible
and correction meaningless. In this world, however, forgiveness depends
on justice since all attack can only be unjust. Justice is the Holy
Spirit's verdict upon the world. Except in His judgment, justice is
impossible, for no one in the world is capable of making only just
interpretations and laying all injustices aside. If God's Son were
fairly judged, there would be no need for salvation. The thought of
separation would have been forever inconceivable.

^2^ Justice, like its opposite, is an interpretation. It is, however,
the one interpretation that leads to truth. This becomes possible
because, while it is not true in itself, justice includes nothing that
opposes truth. There is no inherent conflict between justice and truth;
one is but the first small step in the direction of the other. The path
becomes quite different as one goes along. Nor could all the
magnificence, the grandeur of the scene and the enormous opening vistas
that rise to meet one as he travels on, be foretold from the outset. Yet
even these, whose splendor reaches indescribable heights as one
proceeds, falls short indeed of all that awaits one when the pathway
ceases and time ends with it. But somewhere one must start. Justice is
the beginning.

^3^ All concepts of your brothers and yourself, all fears of future
states, and all concern about the past stem from injustice. Here is the
lens which, held before the body's eyes, distorts perception and brings
witness of the distorted world back to the mind that made the lens and
holds it very dear. Selectively and arbitrarily is every concept of the
world built up in just this way. "Sins" are perceived and justified by
this careful selectivity in which all thought of wholeness must be lost.
Forgiveness has no place in such a scheme, for not one "sin" but seems
forever true.

^4^ Salvation is God's justice. It restores to your awareness the
wholeness of the fragments you perceive as broken off and separate. And
it is this that overcomes the fear of death. For separate fragments must
decay and die, but wholeness is immortal. It remains forever and forever
like its Creator, being one with Him. God's Judgment is His justice.
Onto this---a judgment wholly lacking in condemnation, an evaluation
based entirely on love---you have projected your injustice, attributing
to God the lens of warped perception through which you look. Now it
belongs to Him and not to you. You are afraid of Him and do not see you
hate and fear your Self as enemy.

^5^ Pray for God's justice, and do not confuse His mercy with your own
insanity. Perception can make whatever picture the mind desires to see.
Remember this. In this lies either Heaven or hell, as you elect. God's
justice points to Heaven just because it is entirely impartial. It
accepts all evidence that is brought before it, omitting nothing and
assessing nothing as separate and apart from all the rest. From this one
standpoint does it judge, and this alone. Here all attack and
condemnation becomes meaningless and indefensible. Perception rests, the
mind is still, and light returns again. Vision is now restored. What had
been lost has now been found. The peace of God descends on all the world
and we can see. And we can see!
:::

[]{#part0084.html}

::: {.body}
# [**20. What Is the Peace of God?**](#part0004.html#chap-66) {#part0084.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ It has been said that there is a kind of peace that is not of this
world. How is it recognized? How is it found? And being found, how can
it be retained? Let us consider each of these questions separately, for
each reflects a different step along the way.

^2^ First, how can the peace of God be recognized? God's peace is
recognized at first by just one thing---in every way it is totally
unlike all previous experiences. It calls to mind nothing that went
before. It brings with it no past associations. It is a new thing
entirely. There is a contrast, yes, between this thing and all the past.
But strangely, it is not a contrast of true differences. The past just
slips away and in its place is everlasting quiet. Only that. The
contrast first perceived has merely gone. Quiet has reached to cover
everything.

^3^ How is this quiet found? No one can fail to find it who but seeks
out its conditions. God's peace can never come where anger is, for anger
must deny that peace exists. Who sees anger as justified in any way or
any circumstance proclaims that peace is meaningless and must believe
that it cannot exist. In this condition peace cannot be found. Therefore
forgiveness is the necessary condition for finding the peace of God.
More than this, given forgiveness there must be peace. For what except
attack will lead to war? And what but peace is opposite to war? Here the
initial contrast stands out clear and apparent. Yet when peace is found,
the war is meaningless. And it is conflict now that is perceived as
non-existent and unreal.

^4^ How is the peace of God retained once it is found? Returning anger
in whatever form will drop the heavy curtain once again, and the belief
that peace cannot exist will certainly return. War is again accepted as
the one reality. Now must you once again lay down your sword, although
you may not recognize that you have picked it up again. But you will
learn, as you remember even faintly now what happiness was yours without
it, that you must have taken it again as your defense. Stop for a moment
now, and think of this: is conflict what you want, or is God's peace the
better choice? Which gives you more? A tranquil mind is not a little
gift. Would you not rather live than choose to die?

^5^ Living is joy, but death can only weep. You see in death escape from
what you made. But this you do not see---that you made death, and it is
but illusion of an end. Death cannot be escape because it is not life in
which the problem lies. Life has no opposite, for it is God. Life and
death seem to be opposites because you have decided that death ends
life. Forgive the world, and you will understand that everything which
God created cannot have an end, and nothing He did not create is real.
In this one sentence is our course explained. In this one sentence is
our practicing given its one direction. And in this the Holy Spirit's
whole curriculum is specified exactly as it is.

^6^ What is the peace of God? No more than this---the simple
understanding that His Will is wholly without opposite. There is no
thought that contradicts His Will yet can be true. The contrast between
His Will and yours but seemed to be reality. In truth there is no
conflict because His Will is yours. Now is the mighty Will of God
Himself His gift to you. He does not seek to keep it for Himself. Why
would you seek to keep your tiny, frail imaginings apart from Him? The
Will of God is one and all there is. This is your heritage. The universe
beyond the sun and stars and all the thoughts of which you can conceive
belong to you. God's peace is the condition for His Will. Attain His
peace, and you remember Him.
:::

[]{#part0085.html}

::: {.body}
# [**21. What Is the Role of Words in Healing?**](#part0004.html#chap-67) {#part0085.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Strictly speaking, words play no part at all in healing. The
motivating factor is prayer, or asking. What you ask for, you receive.
But this refers to the prayer of the heart, not to the words you use in
praying. Sometimes the words and the prayer are contradictory; sometimes
they agree. It does not matter. God does not understand words, for they
were made by separated minds to keep them in the illusion of separation.
Words can be helpful, particularly for the beginner, in helping
concentration and facilitating the exclusion or at least the control of
extraneous thoughts. Let us not forget, however, that words are but
symbols of symbols. They are thus twice removed from reality.

^2^ As symbols, words have quite specific references. Even when they
seem most abstract, the picture that comes to mind is apt to be very
concrete. Unless a specific referent does occur to the mind in
conjunction with the word, the word has little or no practical meaning
and thus cannot help the healing process. The prayer of the heart does
not really ask for concrete things. It always requests some kind of
experience, the specific things asked for being the bringers of the
desired experience in the judgment of the asker. The words, then, are
symbols for the things asked for, but the things themselves but stand
for the experiences which are hoped for.

^3^ The prayer for things of this world will bring experiences of this
world. If the prayer of the heart asks for this, this will be given
because this will be received. It is impossible that the prayer of the
heart remain unanswered in the perception of the one who asks. If he
asks for the impossible, if he wants what does not exist or seeks for
illusions in his heart, all this becomes his own. The power of his
decision offers it to him, as he requests. Herein lie hell and Heaven.
The sleeping Son of God has but this power left to him. It is enough.
His words do not matter. Only the Word of God has any meaning because it
symbolizes that which has no human symbols at all. The Holy Spirit alone
understands what this Word stands for. And this, too, is enough.

^4^ Is the teacher of God then to avoid the use of words in his
teaching? No, indeed. There are many who must be reached through words,
being as yet unable to hear in silence. The teacher of God must,
however, learn to use words in a new way. Gradually, he learns how to
let his words be chosen for him by ceasing to decide for himself what he
will say. This process is merely a special case of the workbook lesson
"I will step back and let Him lead the way." The teacher of God accepts
the words which are offered him and gives as he receives. He does not
control the direction of his speaking. He listens and hears and speaks.

^5^ A major hindrance in this aspect of his learning is the teacher of
God's fear about the validity of what he hears. And what he hears may
indeed be quite startling. It may also seem to be quite irrelevant to
the presented problem as he perceives it, and may, in fact, confront him
with a situation that appears to be very embarrassing. All these are
judgments which have no value. They are his own, coming from a shabby
self-perception that he would leave behind. Judge not the words that
come to you, but offer them in confidence. They are far wiser than your
own. God's teachers have God's Word behind their symbols. And He Himself
gives to the words they use the power of His Spirit, raising them from
meaningless symbols to the call of Heaven itself.
:::

[]{#part0086.html}

::: {.body}
# [**22. How Are Healing and Atonement Related?**](#part0004.html#chap-68) {#part0086.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Healing and Atonement are not related; they are identical. There is
no order of difficulty in miracles because there are no degrees of
Atonement. It is the one complete concept possible in this world because
it is the source of a wholly unified perception. Partial Atonement is a
meaningless idea, just as special areas of hell in Heaven is
inconceivable. Accept Atonement, and you are healed. Atonement is the
Word of God. Accept His Word, and what remains to make sickness
possible? Accept His Word, and every miracle has been accomplished. To
forgive is to heal. The teacher of God has taken accepting the Atonement
for himself as his only function. What is there, then, he cannot heal?
What miracle can be withheld from him?

^2^ The progress of the teacher of God may be slow or rapid, depending
on whether he recognizes the Atonement's inclusiveness or for a time
excludes some problem areas from it. In some cases, there is a sudden
and complete awareness of the perfect applicability of the lesson of the
Atonement to all situations. This, however, is comparatively rare. The
teacher of God may have accepted the function God has given him long
before he has learned all that his acceptance holds out to him. It is
only the end that is certain. Anywhere along the way, the necessary
realization of inclusiveness may reach him. If the way seems long, let
him be content. He has decided on the direction he will take. What more
was asked of him? And having done what was required, would God withhold
the rest?

^3^ That forgiveness is healing needs to be understood if the teacher of
God is to make progress. The idea that a body can be sick is a central
concept in the ego's thought system. This thought gives the body
autonomy, separates it from the mind, and keeps the idea of attack
inviolate. If the body could be sick, Atonement would be impossible. A
body that can order a mind to do as it sees fit would merely take the
place of God and prove salvation is impossible. What then is left to
heal? The body has become lord of the mind. How could the mind be
returned to the Holy Spirit unless the body is killed? And who would
want salvation at such a price?

^4^ Certainly sickness does not appear to be a decision. Nor would
anyone actually believe he wants to be sick. Perhaps he can accept the
idea in theory, but it is rarely if ever consistently applied to all
specific forms of sickness, both in the individual's perception of
himself and of all others as well. Nor is it at this level that the
teacher of God calls forth the miracle of healing. He overlooks the mind
and body, seeing only the face of Christ shining in front of him,
correcting all mistakes and healing all perception. Healing is the
result of the recognition by God's teacher of Who it is that is in need
of healing. This recognition has no special reference. It is true of all
things that God created. In it are all illusions healed.

^5^ When a teacher of God fails to heal, it is because he has forgotten
Who he is. Another's sickness thus becomes his own. In allowing this to
happen, he has identified with another's ego and has thus confused him
with a body. In so doing, he has refused to accept the Atonement for
himself and can hardly offer it to his brother in Christ's Name. He
will, in fact, be unable to recognize his brother at all, for his Father
did not create bodies, and so he is seeing in his brother only the
unreal. Mistakes do not correct mistakes, and distorted perception does
not heal. Step back now, teacher of God. You have been wrong. Lead not
the way, for you have lost it. Turn quickly to your Teacher, and let
yourself be healed.

^6^ The offer of Atonement is universal. It is equally applicable to all
individuals in all circumstances. And in it is the power to heal all
individuals of all forms of sickness. Not to believe this is to be
unfair to God and thus unfaithful to Him. A sick person perceives
himself as separate from God. Would you see him as separate from you? It
is your task to heal the sense of separation that has made him sick. It
is your function to recognize for him that what he believes about
himself is not the truth. It is your forgiveness that must show him
this. Healing is very simple. Atonement is received and offered. Having
been received, it must be accepted. It is in the receiving, then, that
healing lies. All else must follow from this single purpose.

^7^ Who can limit the power of God Himself? Who then can say who can be
healed of what and what must remain beyond God's power to forgive? This
is insanity indeed. It is not up to God's teachers to set limits upon
Him because it is not up to them to judge His Son. And to judge His Son
is to limit his Father. Both are equally meaningless. Yet this will not
be understood until God's teacher recognizes that they are the same
mistake. Herein does he receive Atonement, for he withdraws his judgment
from the Son of God, accepting him as God created him. No longer does he
stand apart from God, determining where healing should be given and
where it should be withheld. Now can he say with God, "This is my
beloved Son, created perfect and forever so."
:::

[]{#part0087.html}

::: {.body}
# [**23. Does Jesus Have a Special Place in Healing?**](#part0004.html#chap-69) {#part0087.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ God's gifts can rarely be received directly. Even the most advanced
of God's teachers will give way to temptation in this world. Would it be
fair if their pupils were denied healing because of this? The Bible
says, "Ask in the name of Jesus Christ." Is this merely an appeal to
magic? A name does not heal, nor does an invocation call forth any
special power. What does it mean to call on Jesus Christ? What does
calling on his name confer? Why is the appeal to him part of healing?

^2^ We have repeatedly stated that one who has perfectly accepted the
Atonement for himself can heal the world. Indeed, he has already done
so. Temptation may recur to others, but never to this one. He has become
the risen Son of God. He has overcome death because he has accepted
life. He has recognized himself as God created him, and in so doing he
has recognized all living things as part of him. There is now no limit
on his power because it is the Power of God. So has his name become the
name of God, for he no longer sees himself as separate from Him.

^3^ What does this mean to you? It means that in remembering Jesus, you
are remembering God. The whole relationship of the Son to the Father
lies in him. His part in the Sonship is also yours, and his completed
learning guarantees your own success. Is he still available for help?
What did he say about this? Remember his promises, and ask yourself
honestly whether it is likely that he will fail to keep them. Can God
fail His Son? And can one who is one with God be unlike Him? Who
transcends the body has transcended limitation. Would the greatest
teacher be unavailable to those who follow him?

^4^ The name of Jesus Christ as such is but a symbol. But it stands for
love that is not of this world. It is a symbol that can safely be used
as a replacement for the many names of all the gods you pray to. It
becomes the shining symbol for the Word of God, so close to what it
stands for that the little space between the two is lost the moment that
the name is called to mind. Remembering His name is to give thanks for
all the gifts that God has given you. And gratitude to God becomes the
way in which He is remembered, for love cannot be far behind a grateful
heart and thankful mind. God enters easily, for these are the true
conditions for your coming home.

^5^ Jesus has led the way. Why would you not be grateful to him? He has
asked for love, but only that he might give it to you. You do not love
yourself. But in his eyes your loveliness is so complete and flawless
that he sees in it an image of his Father. You become the symbol of his
Father here on earth. To you he looks for hope because in you he sees no
limit and no stain to mar your beautiful perfection. In his eyes
Christ's vision shines in perfect constancy. He has remained with you.
Would you not learn the lesson of salvation through his learning? Why
would you choose to start again when he has made the journey for you?

^6^ No one on earth can grasp what Heaven is or what its one Creator
really means. Yet we have witnesses. It is to them that wisdom would
appeal. There have been those whose learning far exceeds what you can
learn. Nor would we teach the limitations we have laid on us. No one who
has become a true and dedicated teacher of God forgets his brothers. Yet
what he can offer them is limited by what he learns himself. Then turn
to one who laid all limits by and went beyond the farthest reach of
learning. He will take you with him, for he did not go alone. And you
were with him then, as you are now.

^7^ This course has come from him because his words have reached you in
a language you can love and understand. Are other teachers possible to
lead the way to those who speak in different tongues and appeal to
different symbols? Certainly there are. Would God leave anyone without a
very present help in time of trouble? A savior who can symbolize
Himself? Yet do we need a many-faceted curriculum, not because of
content differences but because symbols must shift and change to suit
the need. Jesus has come to answer yours. In him you find God's Answer.
Do you then teach with him, for he is with you; he is always here.
:::

[]{#part0088.html}

::: {.body}
# [**24. Is Reincarnation True?**](#part0004.html#chap-70) {#part0088.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ In the ultimate sense, reincarnation is impossible. There is no past
nor future, and the idea of birth into a body has no meaning either once
or many times. Reincarnation cannot, then, be true in any real sense.
Our only question should be, "Is the concept helpful?" And that depends
of course on what it is used for. If it is used to strengthen the
recognition of the eternal nature of life, it is helpful indeed. Is any
other question about it really useful in lighting up the way? Like many
other beliefs, it can be bitterly misused. At least, such misuse offers
preoccupation and perhaps pride in the past. At worst, it induces
inertia in the present. In between many kinds of folly are possible.

^2^ Reincarnation would not, under any circumstances, be the problem to
be dealt with now. If it were responsible for some of the difficulties
the individual faces now, his task would still be only to escape from
them now. If he is laying the groundwork for a future life, he can still
work out his salvation only now. To some there may be comfort in the
concept, and if it heartens them, its value is self-evident. It is
certain, however, that the way to salvation can be found by those who
believe in reincarnation and by those who do not. The idea cannot,
therefore, be regarded as essential to the curriculum. There is always
some risk in seeing the present in terms of the past. There is always
some good in any thought which strengthens the idea that life and the
body are not the same.

^3^ For our purposes, it would not be helpful to take any definite stand
on reincarnation. A teacher of God should be as helpful to those who
believe in it as to those who do not. If a definite stand on it were
required of him, it would merely limit his usefulness as well as his own
decision-making. Our course is not concerned with any concept that is
not acceptable to anyone, regardless of his formal beliefs. His ego will
be enough for him to cope with, and it is not part of wisdom to add
sectarian controversies to his burdens. Nor would there be an advantage
in his premature acceptance of the course merely because it advocates a
long-held belief of his own.

^4^ It cannot be too strongly emphasized that this course aims at a
complete reversal of thought. When this is finally accomplished, issues
such as the validity of reincarnation become meaningless. Until then
they are likely to be merely controversial. The teacher of God is
therefore wise to step away from all such questions, for he has much to
teach and learn apart from them. He should both learn and teach that
theoretical issues but waste time, draining it away from its appointed
purpose. If there are aspects to any concept or belief that will be
helpful, he will be told about it. He will also be told how to use it.
What more need he know?

^5^ Does this mean that the teacher of God should not believe in
reincarnation himself or discuss it with others who do? The answer is
certainly not! If he does believe in reincarnation, it would be a
mistake for him to renounce the belief unless his Internal Teacher so
advised. And this is most unlikely. He might be advised that he is
misusing the belief in some way which is detrimental to his pupil's
advance or his own. Reinterpretation would then be recommended because
it would be necessary. All that must be recognized, however, is that
birth was not the beginning and death is not the end. Yet even this much
is not required of the beginner. He need merely accept the idea that
what he knows is not necessarily all there is to learn. His journey has
begun.

^6^ The emphasis of this course always remains the same---it is at this
moment that complete salvation is offered you, and it is at this moment
that you can accept it. This is still your one responsibility. Atonement
might be equated with total escape from the past and total lack of
interest in the future. Heaven is here. There is nowhere else. Heaven is
now. There is no other time. No teaching that does not lead to this is
of concern to God's teachers. All beliefs will point to this if properly
interpreted. In this sense it can be said that their truth lies in their
usefulness. All beliefs that lead to progress should be honored. This is
the sole criterion this course requires. No more than this is necessary.
:::

[]{#part0089.html}

::: {.body}
# [**25. Are "Psychic" Powers Desirable?**](#part0004.html#chap-71) {#part0089.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ The answer to this question is much like the preceding one. There
are, of course, no "unnatural" powers, and it is obviously merely an
appeal to magic to make up a power that does not exist. It is equally
obvious, however, that each individual has many abilities of which he is
unaware. As his awareness increases, he may well develop abilities that
seem quite startling to him. Yet nothing he can do can compare even in
the slightest with the glorious surprise of remembering who he is. Let
all his learning and all his efforts be directed toward this one great
final surprise, and he will not be content to be delayed by the little
ones that may come to him on the way.

^2^ Certainly there are many "psychic" powers that are clearly in line
with this course. Communication is not limited to the small range of
channels the world recognizes. If it were, there would be little point
in trying to teach salvation. It would be impossible to do so. The
limits the world places on communication are the chief barrier to direct
experience of the Holy Spirit, Whose Presence is always there and Whose
Voice is available but for the hearing. These limits are placed out of
fear, for without them the walls that surround all the separate places
of the world would fall at the holy sound of His Voice. Who transcends
these limits in any way is merely becoming more natural. He is doing
nothing special, and there is no magic in his accomplishments.

^3^ The seemingly new abilities that may be gathered on the way can be
very helpful. Given to the Holy Spirit and used under His direction,
they are valuable teaching aids. To this the question of how they arise
is irrelevant. The only important consideration is how they are used.
Taking them as ends in themselves, no matter how this is done, will
delay progress. Nor does their value lie in proving
anything---achievements from the past, unusual attunement with the
"unseen," or special favors from God. God gives no special favors, and
no one has any powers that are not available to everyone. Only by tricks
of magic are special powers "demonstrated."

^4^ Nothing that is genuine is used to deceive. The Holy Spirit is
incapable of deception, and He can use only genuine abilities. What is
used for magic is useless to Him, but what He uses cannot be used for
magic. There is, however, a particular appeal in unusual abilities which
can be curiously tempting. Here are strengths which the Holy Spirit
wants and needs. Yet the ego sees in these same strengths an opportunity
to glorify itself. Strengths turned to weakness are tragedy indeed. Yet
what is not given to the Holy Spirit must be given to weakness, for what
is withheld from love is given to fear and will be fearful in
consequence.

^5^ Even those who no longer value the material things of the world may
still be deceived by "psychic" powers. As investment has been withdrawn
from the world's material gifts, the ego has been seriously threatened.
It may still be strong enough to rally under this new temptation to win
back strength by guile. Many have not seen through the ego's defenses
here, although they are not particularly subtle. Yet, given a remaining
wish to be deceived, deception is made easy. Now the "power" is no
longer a genuine ability and cannot be used dependably. It is almost
inevitable that, unless the individual changes his mind about its
purpose, he will bolster its uncertainties with increasing deception.

^6^ Any ability that anyone develops has the potentiality for good. To
this there is no exception. And the more unusual and unexpected the
power, the greater its potential usefulness. Salvation has need of all
abilities, for what the world would destroy, the Holy Spirit would
restore. "Psychic" abilities have been used to call upon the devil,
which merely means to strengthen the ego. Yet here is also a great
channel of hope and healing in the Holy Spirit's service. Those who have
developed "psychic" powers have simply let some of the limitations they
laid upon their minds be lifted. It can be but greater limitations they
lay upon themselves if they utilize their increased freedom for greater
imprisonment. The Holy Spirit needs these gifts, and those who offer
them to Him and Him alone go with Christ's gratitude upon their hearts,
and His holy sight not far behind.
:::

[]{#part0090.html}

::: {.body}
# [**26. Can God Be Reached Directly?**](#part0004.html#chap-72) {#part0090.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ God indeed can be reached directly, for there is no distance between
Him and His Son. His awareness is in everyone's memory, and His Word is
written on everyone's heart. Yet this awareness and this memory can
arise across the threshold of the unconscious only where all barriers to
truth have been removed. In how many is this the case? Here then is the
role of God's teachers. They too have not attained the necessary
understanding as yet, but they have joined with others. This is what
sets them apart from the world. And it is this that enables others to
leave the world with them. Alone they are nothing. But in their joining
is the Power of God.

^2^ There are those who have reached God directly, retaining no trace of
worldly limits and remembering their own Identity perfectly. These might
be called the teachers of teachers because, although they are no longer
visible, their image can yet be called upon. And they will appear when
and where it is helpful for them to do so. To those to whom such
appearances would be frightening, they give their ideas. No one can call
on them in vain. Nor is there anyone of whom they are unaware. All needs
are known to them, and all mistakes are recognized and overlooked by
them. The time will come when this is understood. And meanwhile they
give all their gifts to the teachers of God who look to them for help,
asking all things in their name and in no other.

^3^ Sometimes a teacher of God may have a brief experience of direct
union with God. In this world, it is almost impossible that this endure.
It can, perhaps, be won after much devotion and dedication and then be
maintained for most of the time on earth. But this is so rare that it
cannot be considered a realistic goal. If it happens, so be it. If it
does not happen, so be it as well. All worldly states must be illusory.
If God were reached directly in sustained awareness, the body would not
be long maintained. Those who have laid the body down merely to extend
their helpfulness to those remaining behind are few indeed. And they
need helpers who are still in bondage and still asleep, so that by their
awakening can God's Voice be heard.

^4^ Do not despair, then, because of limitations. It is your function to
escape from them, but not to be without them. If you would be heard by
those who suffer, you must speak their language. If you would be
saviors, you must understand what needs to be escaped. Salvation is not
theoretical. Behold the problem, ask for the answer, and then accept it
when it comes. Nor will its coming be long delayed. All the help you can
accept will be provided, and not one need you have will not be met. Let
us not, then, be too concerned with goals for which you are not ready.
God takes you where you are and welcomes you. What more could you
desire, when this is all you need?
:::

[]{#part0091.html}

::: {.body}
# [**27. What Is Death?**](#part0004.html#chap-73) {#part0091.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Death is the central dream from which all illusions stem. Is it not
madness to think of life as being born, aging, losing vitality, and
dying in the end? We have asked this question before, but now we need to
consider it still more carefully. It is the one fixed, unchangeable
belief of the world that all things in it are born only to die. This is
regarded as "the way of nature," not to be raised to question but to be
accepted as the "natural" law of life. The cyclical, the changing and
unsure, the undependable and the unsteady, waxing and waning in a
certain way upon a certain path---all this is taken as the Will of God.
And no one asks if a benign Creator could will this.

^2^ In this perception of the universe as God created it, it would not
be possible to think of Him as loving. For who has decreed that all
things pass away, ending in dust and disappointment and despair could
but be feared. He holds your little life in his hand but by a thread,
ready to break it off without regret or care, perhaps today. Or if he
waits, yet is the ending certain. Who loves such a god knows not of love
because he has denied that life is real. Death has become life's symbol.
His world is now a battleground where contradiction reigns, and
opposites make endless war. Where there is death is peace impossible.

^3^ Death is the symbol of the fear of God. His love is blotted out in
the idea, which holds it from awareness like a shield held to obscure
the sun. The grimness of the symbol is enough to show it cannot co-exist
with God. It holds an image of the Son of God in which he is "laid to
rest" in devastation's arms, where worms wait to greet him and to last a
little while by his destruction. Yet the worms as well are doomed to be
destroyed as certainly. And so do all things live because of death.
Devouring is nature's "law of life." God is insane, and fear alone is
real.

^4^ The curious belief that there is part of dying things that may go on
apart from what will die does not proclaim a loving God nor re-establish
any grounds for trust. If death is real for anything, there is no life.
Death denies life, but if there is reality in life, death is denied. No
compromise in this is possible. There is either a god of fear or One of
Love. The world attempts a thousand compromises and will attempt a
thousand more. Not one can be acceptable to God's teachers because not
one could be acceptable to God. He did not make death because He did not
make fear. Both are equally meaningless to Him.

^5^ The "reality" of death is firmly rooted in the belief that God's Son
is a body. And if God created bodies, death would indeed be real. But
God would not be loving. There is no point at which the contrast between
the perception of the real world and that of the world of illusions
becomes more sharply evident. Death is indeed the death of God if He is
Love. And now His own creation must stand in fear of Him. He is not
Father but destroyer. He is not Creator but avenger. Terrible His
Thoughts and fearful His image. To look on His creations is to die.

^6^ "And the last to be overcome will be death." Of course! Without the
idea of death, there is no world. All dreams will end with this one.
This is salvation's final goal, the end of all illusions. And in death
are all illusions born. What can be born of death and still have life?
But what is born of God and still can die? The inconsistencies, the
compromises, and the rituals the world fosters in its vain attempts to
cling to death and yet to think love real are mindless magic,
ineffectual and meaningless. God is, and in Him all created things must
be eternal. Do you not see that otherwise He has an opposite, and fear
would be as real as love?

^7^ Teacher of God, your one assignment could be stated thus: accept no
compromise in which death plays a part. Do not believe in cruelty nor
let attack conceal the truth from you. What seems to die has but been
misperceived and carried to illusion. Now it becomes your task to let
the illusion be brought to the truth. Be steadfast but in this; be not
deceived by the "reality" of any changing form. Truth neither moves nor
wavers nor sinks down to death and dissolution. And what is the end of
death? Nothing but this: the realization that the Son of God is
guiltless now and forever. Nothing but this. But do not let yourself
forget it is not less than this.
:::

[]{#part0092.html}

::: {.body}
# [**28. What Is the Resurrection?**](#part0004.html#chap-74) {#part0092.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ Very simply, the resurrection is the overcoming or surmounting of
death. It is a reawakening or a rebirth, a change of mind about the
meaning of the world. It is the acceptance of the Holy Spirit's
interpretation of the world's purpose; the acceptance of the Atonement
for oneself. It is the end of dreams of misery and the glad awareness of
the Holy Spirit's final dream. It is the recognition of the gifts of
God. It is the dream in which the body functions perfectly, having no
function except communication. It is the lesson in which learning ends,
for it is consummated and surpassed with this. It is the invitation to
God to take His final step. It is the relinquishment of all other
purposes, all other interests, all other wishes, and all other concerns.
It is the single desire of the Son for the Father.

^2^ The resurrection is the denial of death, being the assertion of
life. Thus is all the thinking of the world reversed entirely. Life is
now recognized as salvation, and pain and misery of any kind perceived
as hell. Love is no longer feared but gladly welcomed. Idols have
disappeared, and the remembrance of God shines unimpeded across the
world. Christ's face is seen in every living thing, and nothing is held
in darkness apart from the light of forgiveness. There is no sorrow
still upon the earth. The joy of Heaven has come upon it.

^3^ Here the curriculum ends. From here on no directions are needed.
Vision is wholly corrected and all mistakes undone. Attack is
meaningless, and peace has come. The goal of the curriculum has been
achieved. Thoughts turn to Heaven and away from hell. All longings are
satisfied, for what remains unanswered or incomplete? The last illusion
spreads over the world, forgiving all things and replacing all attack.
The whole reversal is accomplished. Nothing is left to contradict the
Word of God. There is no opposition to the truth. And now the truth can
come at last. How quickly will it come as it is asked to enter and
envelop such a world!

^4^ All living hearts are tranquil, with a stir of deep anticipation,
for the time of everlasting things is now at hand. There is no death.
The Son of God is free. And in his freedom is the end of fear. No hidden
places now remain on earth to shelter sick illusions, dreams of fear,
and misperceptions of the universe. All things are seen in light, and in
the light their purpose is transformed and understood. And we, God's
children, rise up from the dust and look upon our perfect sinlessness.
The song of Heaven sounds around the world, as it is lifted up and
brought to truth.

^5^ Now there are no distinctions. Differences have disappeared, and
Love looks on Itself. What further sight is needed? What remains that
vision could accomplish? We have seen the face of Christ, His
sinlessness, His love behind all forms, beyond all purposes. Holy are we
because His holiness has set us free indeed, and we accept His holiness
as ours, as it is. As God created us, so will we be forever and forever,
and we wish for nothing but His Will to be our own. Illusions of another
will are lost, for unity of purpose has been found.

^6^ These things await us all, but we are not prepared as yet to welcome
them with joy. As long as any mind remains possessed of evil dreams, the
thought of hell is real. God's teachers have the goal of wakening the
minds of those asleep and seeing there the vision of Christ's face to
take the place of what they dreamed. The thought of murder is replaced
with blessing. Judgment is laid by and given Him Whose function judgment
is. And in His Final Judgment is restored the truth about the holy Son
of God. He is redeemed, for he has heard God's Word and understood its
meaning. He is free because he let God's Voice proclaim the truth. And
all he sought before to crucify are resurrected with him, by his side as
he prepares with them to meet his God.
:::

[]{#part0093.html}

::: {.body}
# [**29. As For the Rest**](#part0004.html#chap-75) {#part0093.html#calibre_pb_0 .toc-title}

^1^ This manual is not intended to answer all questions that both
teacher and pupil may raise. In fact, it covers only a few of the more
obvious ones in terms of a brief summary of some of the major concepts
in the text and workbook. It is not a substitute for either, but merely
a supplement. While it is called a manual for teachers, it must be
remembered that only time divides teacher and pupil, so that the
difference is temporary by definition. In some cases, it may be helpful
for the pupil to read the manual first. Others might do better to begin
with the workbook. Still others may need to start at the more abstract
level of the text.

^2^ Which is for whom? Who would profit more from prayers alone? Who
needs but a smile, being as yet unready for more? No one should attempt
to answer these questions alone. Surely no teacher of God has come this
far without realizing that. The curriculum is highly individualized. And
all aspects are under the Holy Spirit's particular care and guidance.
Ask and He will answer. The responsibility is His, and He alone is fit
to assume it. To do so is His function. To refer the questions to Him is
yours. Would you want to be responsible for decisions about which you
understand so little? Be glad you have a Teacher Who cannot make a
mistake. His answers are always right. Would you say that of yours?

^3^ There is another advantage---and a very important one---in referring
decisions to the Holy Spirit with increasing frequency. Perhaps you have
not thought of this aspect, but its centrality is obvious. To follow the
Holy Spirit's guidance is to let yourself be absolved of guilt. It is
the essence of the Atonement. It is the core of the curriculum. The
imagined usurping of functions not your own is the basis of fear. The
whole world you see reflects the illusion you have done so, making fear
inevitable. To return the function to the One to Whom it belongs is thus
the escape from fear. And it is this that lets the memory of love return
to you. Do not, then, think that following the Holy Spirit's guidance is
necessary merely because of your own inadequacies. It is the way out of
hell for you.

^4^ Here again is the paradox often referred to in the course. To say,
"Of myself I can do nothing" is to gain all power. And yet it is but a
seeming paradox. As God created you, you have all power. The image you
made of yourself has none. The Holy Spirit knows the truth about you.
The image you made does not. Yet despite its obvious and complete
ignorance, this image assumes it knows all things because you have given
that belief to it. Such is your teaching and the teaching of the world
which was made to uphold it. But the Teacher Who knows the truth has not
forgotten it. His decisions bring benefit to all, being wholly devoid of
attack. And therefore incapable of arousing guilt.

^5^ Who assumes a power that he does not have is deceiving himself. Yet
to accept the power given him by God is but to acknowledge his Creator
and accept His gifts. And His gifts have no limit. To ask the Holy
Spirit to decide for you is simply to accept your true inheritance. Does
this mean that you cannot decide anything without consulting Him? No
indeed! That would hardly be practical, and it is the practical with
which this course is most concerned. If you have made it a habit to ask
for help when and where you can, you can be confident that wisdom will
be given you when you need it. Prepare for this each morning, remember
God when you can throughout the day, ask the Holy Spirit's help when it
is possible to do so, and thank Him for His guidance at night. And your
confidence will be well founded indeed.

^6^ Never forget that the Holy Spirit does not depend on your words. He
understands the requests of your heart and answers them. Does this mean
that while attack remains attractive to you, He will respond with evil?
Hardly! For God has given Him the power to translate your prayers of the
heart into His language. He understands that an attack is a call for
help. And He responds with help accordingly. God would be cruel if He
let your words replace His Own. A loving father does not let his child
harm himself or choose his own destruction. He may ask for injury, but
his father will protect him still. And how much more than this does your
Father love His Son?

^7^ Remember you are His completion and His Love. Remember your weakness
is His strength. But do not read this hastily or wrongly. If His
strength is in you, what you perceive as your weakness is but illusion.
And He has given you the means to prove it so. Ask all things of His
Teacher, and all things are given you. Not in the future but
immediately---now. God does not wait, for waiting implies time and He is
timeless. Forget your foolish images, your sense of frailty and your
fear of harm, your dreams of danger and selected "wrongs." God knows but
His Son, and as he was created, so he is. In confidence I place you in
His hands, and I give thanks for you that this is so.

^8^ And now in all your doings be you blessed.\
God turns to you for help to save the world.\
Teacher of God, His thanks He offers you,\
And all the world stands silent in the grace\
You bring from Him. You are the Son He loves,\
And it is given you to be the means\
Through which His Voice is heard around the world\
To close all things of time, to end the sight\
Of all things visible, and to undo\
All things that change. Through you is ushered in\
A world unseen, unheard, yet truly there.\
Holy are you, and in your light the world\
Reflects your holiness, for you are not\
Alone and friendless. I give thanks for you\
And join your efforts on behalf of God,\
Knowing they are on my behalf as well\
And for all those who walk to God with me.
:::
